Produced by Gordon Keener








THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


By Bertrand Russell




PREFACE

In the following pages I have confined myself in the main to those
problems of philosophy in regard to which I thought it possible to say
something positive and constructive, since merely negative criticism
seemed out of place. For this reason, theory of knowledge occupies a
larger space than metaphysics in the present volume, and some topics
much discussed by philosophers are treated very briefly, if at all.

I have derived valuable assistance from unpublished writings of G. E.
Moore and J. M. Keynes: from the former, as regards the relations
of sense-data to physical objects, and from the latter as regards
probability and induction. I have also profited greatly by the
criticisms and suggestions of Professor Gilbert Murray.

1912




CHAPTER I. APPEARANCE AND REALITY

Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no
reasonable man could doubt it? This question, which at first sight might
not seem difficult, is really one of the most difficult that can
be asked. When we have realized the obstacles in the way of a
straightforward and confident answer, we shall be well launched on the
study of philosophy--for philosophy is merely the attempt to answer
such ultimate questions, not carelessly and dogmatically, as we do in
ordinary life and even in the sciences, but critically, after exploring
all that makes such questions puzzling, and after realizing all the
vagueness and confusion that underlie our ordinary ideas.

In daily life, we assume as certain many things which, on a closer
scrutiny, are found to be so full of apparent contradictions that only a
great amount of thought enables us to know what it is that we really may
believe. In the search for certainty, it is natural to begin with our
present experiences, and in some sense, no doubt, knowledge is to be
derived from them. But any statement as to what it is that our immediate
experiences make us know is very likely to be wrong. It seems to me that
I am now sitting in a chair, at a table of a certain shape, on which I
see sheets of paper with writing or print. By turning my head I see out
of the window buildings and clouds and the sun. I believe that the sun
is about ninety-three million miles from the earth; that it is a hot
globe many times bigger than the earth; that, owing to the earth's
rotation, it rises every morning, and will continue to do so for an
indefinite time in the future. I believe that, if any other normal
person comes into my room, he will see the same chairs and tables and
books and papers as I see, and that the table which I see is the same as
the table which I feel pressing against my arm. All this seems to be
so evident as to be hardly worth stating, except in answer to a man who
doubts whether I know anything. Yet all this may be reasonably doubted,
and all of it requires much careful discussion before we can be sure
that we have stated it in a form that is wholly true.

To make our difficulties plain, let us concentrate attention on the
table. To the eye it is oblong, brown and shiny, to the touch it is
smooth and cool and hard; when I tap it, it gives out a wooden sound.
Any one else who sees and feels and hears the table will agree with this
description, so that it might seem as if no difficulty would arise;
but as soon as we try to be more precise our troubles begin. Although
I believe that the table is 'really' of the same colour all over, the
parts that reflect the light look much brighter than the other parts,
and some parts look white because of reflected light. I know that, if
I move, the parts that reflect the light will be different, so that the
apparent distribution of colours on the table will change. It follows
that if several people are looking at the table at the same moment, no
two of them will see exactly the same distribution of colours, because
no two can see it from exactly the same point of view, and any change in
the point of view makes some change in the way the light is reflected.

For most practical purposes these differences are unimportant, but to
the painter they are all-important: the painter has to unlearn the habit
of thinking that things seem to have the colour which common sense says
they 'really' have, and to learn the habit of seeing things as they
appear. Here we have already the beginning of one of the distinctions
that cause most trouble in philosophy--the distinction between
'appearance' and 'reality', between what things seem to be and what they
are. The painter wants to know what things seem to be, the practical man
and the philosopher want to know what they are; but the philosopher's
wish to know this is stronger than the practical man's, and is more
troubled by knowledge as to the difficulties of answering the question.

To return to the table. It is evident from what we have found, that
there is no colour which pre-eminently appears to be _the_ colour of the
table, or even of any one particular part of the table--it appears to
be of different colours from different points of view, and there is
no reason for regarding some of these as more really its colour than
others. And we know that even from a given point of view the colour will
seem different by artificial light, or to a colour-blind man, or to a
man wearing blue spectacles, while in the dark there will be no colour
at all, though to touch and hearing the table will be unchanged. This
colour is not something which is inherent in the table, but something
depending upon the table and the spectator and the way the light falls
on the table. When, in ordinary life, we speak of _the_ colour of the
table, we only mean the sort of colour which it will seem to have to a
normal spectator from an ordinary point of view under usual conditions
of light. But the other colours which appear under other conditions
have just as good a right to be considered real; and therefore, to avoid
favouritism, we are compelled to deny that, in itself, the table has any
one particular colour.

The same thing applies to the texture. With the naked eye one can see
the grain, but otherwise the table looks smooth and even. If we looked
at it through a microscope, we should see roughnesses and hills and
valleys, and all sorts of differences that are imperceptible to the
naked eye. Which of these is the 'real' table? We are naturally tempted
to say that what we see through the microscope is more real, but that in
turn would be changed by a still more powerful microscope. If, then, we
cannot trust what we see with the naked eye, why should we trust what we
see through a microscope? Thus, again, the confidence in our senses with
which we began deserts us.

The shape of the table is no better. We are all in the habit of judging
as to the 'real' shapes of things, and we do this so unreflectingly that
we come to think we actually see the real shapes. But, in fact, as we
all have to learn if we try to draw, a given thing looks different
in shape from every different point of view. If our table is 'really'
rectangular, it will look, from almost all points of view, as if it had
two acute angles and two obtuse angles. If opposite sides are parallel,
they will look as if they converged to a point away from the spectator;
if they are of equal length, they will look as if the nearer side were
longer. All these things are not commonly noticed in looking at a table,
because experience has taught us to construct the 'real' shape from the
apparent shape, and the 'real' shape is what interests us as practical
men. But the 'real' shape is not what we see; it is something inferred
from what we see. And what we see is constantly changing in shape as we
move about the room; so that here again the senses seem not to give us
the truth about the table itself, but only about the appearance of the
table.

Similar difficulties arise when we consider the sense of touch. It is
true that the table always gives us a sensation of hardness, and we feel
that it resists pressure. But the sensation we obtain depends upon how
hard we press the table and also upon what part of the body we press
with; thus the various sensations due to various pressures or various
parts of the body cannot be supposed to reveal _directly_ any definite
property of the table, but at most to be _signs_ of some property which
perhaps _causes_ all the sensations, but is not actually apparent in any
of them. And the same applies still more obviously to the sounds which
can be elicited by rapping the table.

Thus it becomes evident that the real table, if there is one, is not the
same as what we immediately experience by sight or touch or hearing. The
real table, if there is one, is not _immediately_ known to us at all,
but must be an inference from what is immediately known. Hence, two very
difficult questions at once arise; namely, (1) Is there a real table at
all? (2) If so, what sort of object can it be?

It will help us in considering these questions to have a few simple
terms of which the meaning is definite and clear. Let us give the name
of 'sense-data' to the things that are immediately known in sensation:
such things as colours, sounds, smells, hardnesses, roughnesses, and
so on. We shall give the name 'sensation' to the experience of being
immediately aware of these things. Thus, whenever we see a colour,
we have a sensation _of_ the colour, but the colour itself is a
sense-datum, not a sensation. The colour is that _of_ which we are
immediately aware, and the awareness itself is the sensation. It is
plain that if we are to know anything about the table, it must be
by means of the sense-data--brown colour, oblong shape, smoothness,
etc.--which we associate with the table; but, for the reasons which have
been given, we cannot say that the table is the sense-data, or even
that the sense-data are directly properties of the table. Thus a problem
arises as to the relation of the sense-data to the real table, supposing
there is such a thing.

The real table, if it exists, we will call a 'physical object'. Thus
we have to consider the relation of sense-data to physical objects.
The collection of all physical objects is called 'matter'. Thus our two
questions may be re-stated as follows: (1) Is there any such thing as
matter? (2) If so, what is its nature?

The philosopher who first brought prominently forward the reasons
for regarding the immediate objects of our senses as not existing
independently of us was Bishop Berkeley (1685-1753). His _Three
Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous, in Opposition to Sceptics and
Atheists_, undertake to prove that there is no such thing as matter at
all, and that the world consists of nothing but minds and their ideas.
Hylas has hitherto believed in matter, but he is no match for Philonous,
who mercilessly drives him into contradictions and paradoxes, and makes
his own denial of matter seem, in the end, as if it were almost common
sense. The arguments employed are of very different value: some are
important and sound, others are confused or quibbling. But Berkeley
retains the merit of having shown that the existence of matter is
capable of being denied without absurdity, and that if there are any
things that exist independently of us they cannot be the immediate
objects of our sensations.

There are two different questions involved when we ask whether matter
exists, and it is important to keep them clear. We commonly mean by
'matter' something which is opposed to 'mind', something which we think
of as occupying space and as radically incapable of any sort of thought
or consciousness. It is chiefly in this sense that Berkeley denies
matter; that is to say, he does not deny that the sense-data which we
commonly take as signs of the existence of the table are really signs
of the existence of _something_ independent of us, but he does deny
that this something is non-mental, that it is neither mind nor ideas
entertained by some mind. He admits that there must be something which
continues to exist when we go out of the room or shut our eyes, and that
what we call seeing the table does really give us reason for believing
in something which persists even when we are not seeing it. But he
thinks that this something cannot be radically different in nature from
what we see, and cannot be independent of seeing altogether, though it
must be independent of _our_ seeing. He is thus led to regard the 'real'
table as an idea in the mind of God. Such an idea has the required
permanence and independence of ourselves, without being--as matter would
otherwise be--something quite unknowable, in the sense that we can only
infer it, and can never be directly and immediately aware of it.

Other philosophers since Berkeley have also held that, although the
table does not depend for its existence upon being seen by me, it does
depend upon being seen (or otherwise apprehended in sensation) by
_some_ mind--not necessarily the mind of God, but more often the whole
collective mind of the universe. This they hold, as Berkeley does,
chiefly because they think there can be nothing real--or at any rate
nothing known to be real except minds and their thoughts and feelings.
We might state the argument by which they support their view in some
such way as this: 'Whatever can be thought of is an idea in the mind of
the person thinking of it; therefore nothing can be thought of except
ideas in minds; therefore anything else is inconceivable, and what is
inconceivable cannot exist.'

Such an argument, in my opinion, is fallacious; and of course those who
advance it do not put it so shortly or so crudely. But whether valid or
not, the argument has been very widely advanced in one form or another;
and very many philosophers, perhaps a majority, have held that there is
nothing real except minds and their ideas. Such philosophers are called
'idealists'. When they come to explaining matter, they either say, like
Berkeley, that matter is really nothing but a collection of ideas,
or they say, like Leibniz (1646-1716), that what appears as matter is
really a collection of more or less rudimentary minds.

But these philosophers, though they deny matter as opposed to mind,
nevertheless, in another sense, admit matter. It will be remembered that
we asked two questions; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If
so, what sort of object can it be? Now both Berkeley and Leibniz admit
that there is a real table, but Berkeley says it is certain ideas in the
mind of God, and Leibniz says it is a colony of souls. Thus both of them
answer our first question in the affirmative, and only diverge from the
views of ordinary mortals in their answer to our second question. In
fact, almost all philosophers seem to be agreed that there is a real
table: they almost all agree that, however much our sense-data--colour,
shape, smoothness, etc.--may depend upon us, yet their occurrence is
a sign of something existing independently of us, something differing,
perhaps, completely from our sense-data, and yet to be regarded as
causing those sense-data whenever we are in a suitable relation to the
real table.

Now obviously this point in which the philosophers are agreed--the view
that there _is_ a real table, whatever its nature may be--is vitally
important, and it will be worth while to consider what reasons there are
for accepting this view before we go on to the further question as
to the nature of the real table. Our next chapter, therefore, will be
concerned with the reasons for supposing that there is a real table at
all.

Before we go farther it will be well to consider for a moment what it
is that we have discovered so far. It has appeared that, if we take any
common object of the sort that is supposed to be known by the senses,
what the senses _immediately_ tell us is not the truth about the object
as it is apart from us, but only the truth about certain sense-data
which, so far as we can see, depend upon the relations between us and
the object. Thus what we directly see and feel is merely 'appearance',
which we believe to be a sign of some 'reality' behind. But if the
reality is not what appears, have we any means of knowing whether there
is any reality at all? And if so, have we any means of finding out what
it is like?

Such questions are bewildering, and it is difficult to know that even
the strangest hypotheses may not be true. Thus our familiar table,
which has roused but the slightest thoughts in us hitherto, has become a
problem full of surprising possibilities. The one thing we know about it
is that it is not what it seems. Beyond this modest result, so far, we
have the most complete liberty of conjecture. Leibniz tells us it is a
community of souls: Berkeley tells us it is an idea in the mind of God;
sober science, scarcely less wonderful, tells us it is a vast collection
of electric charges in violent motion.

Among these surprising possibilities, doubt suggests that perhaps there
is no table at all. Philosophy, if it cannot _answer_ so many questions
as we could wish, has at least the power of _asking_ questions which
increase the interest of the world, and show the strangeness and wonder
lying just below the surface even in the commonest things of daily life.



CHAPTER II. THE EXISTENCE OF MATTER

In this chapter we have to ask ourselves whether, in any sense at all,
there is such a thing as matter. Is there a table which has a certain
intrinsic nature, and continues to exist when I am not looking, or is
the table merely a product of my imagination, a dream-table in a very
prolonged dream? This question is of the greatest importance. For if
we cannot be sure of the independent existence of objects, we cannot
be sure of the independent existence of other people's bodies, and
therefore still less of other people's minds, since we have no grounds
for believing in their minds except such as are derived from observing
their bodies. Thus if we cannot be sure of the independent existence of
objects, we shall be left alone in a desert--it may be that the whole
outer world is nothing but a dream, and that we alone exist. This is an
uncomfortable possibility; but although it cannot be strictly proved to
be false, there is not the slightest reason to suppose that it is true.
In this chapter we have to see why this is the case.

Before we embark upon doubtful matters, let us try to find some more
or less fixed point from which to start. Although we are doubting the
physical existence of the table, we are not doubting the existence
of the sense-data which made us think there was a table; we are not
doubting that, while we look, a certain colour and shape appear to us,
and while we press, a certain sensation of hardness is experienced by
us. All this, which is psychological, we are not calling in question.
In fact, whatever else may be doubtful, some at least of our immediate
experiences seem absolutely certain.

Descartes (1596-1650), the founder of modern philosophy, invented a
method which may still be used with profit--the method of systematic
doubt. He determined that he would believe nothing which he did not see
quite clearly and distinctly to be true. Whatever he could bring himself
to doubt, he would doubt, until he saw reason for not doubting it.
By applying this method he gradually became convinced that the only
existence of which he could be _quite_ certain was his own. He imagined
a deceitful demon, who presented unreal things to his senses in a
perpetual phantasmagoria; it might be very improbable that such a demon
existed, but still it was possible, and therefore doubt concerning
things perceived by the senses was possible.

But doubt concerning his own existence was not possible, for if he did
not exist, no demon could deceive him. If he doubted, he must exist; if
he had any experiences whatever, he must exist. Thus his own existence
was an absolute certainty to him. 'I think, therefore I am,' he said
(_Cogito, ergo sum_); and on the basis of this certainty he set to work
to build up again the world of knowledge which his doubt had laid in
ruins. By inventing the method of doubt, and by showing that subjective
things are the most certain, Descartes performed a great service to
philosophy, and one which makes him still useful to all students of the
subject.

But some care is needed in using Descartes' argument. 'I think,
therefore I am' says rather more than is strictly certain. It might seem
as though we were quite sure of being the same person to-day as we were
yesterday, and this is no doubt true in some sense. But the real Self is
as hard to arrive at as the real table, and does not seem to have that
absolute, convincing certainty that belongs to particular experiences.
When I look at my table and see a certain brown colour, what is quite
certain at once is not '_I_ am seeing a brown colour', but rather,
'a brown colour is being seen'. This of course involves something (or
somebody) which (or who) sees the brown colour; but it does not of
itself involve that more or less permanent person whom we call 'I'. So
far as immediate certainty goes, it might be that the something which
sees the brown colour is quite momentary, and not the same as the
something which has some different experience the next moment.

Thus it is our particular thoughts and feelings that have primitive
certainty. And this applies to dreams and hallucinations as well as to
normal perceptions: when we dream or see a ghost, we certainly do have
the sensations we think we have, but for various reasons it is held that
no physical object corresponds to these sensations. Thus the certainty
of our knowledge of our own experiences does not have to be limited in
any way to allow for exceptional cases. Here, therefore, we have, for
what it is worth, a solid basis from which to begin our pursuit of
knowledge.

The problem we have to consider is this: Granted that we are certain of
our own sense-data, have we any reason for regarding them as signs of
the existence of something else, which we can call the physical object?
When we have enumerated all the sense-data which we should naturally
regard as connected with the table, have we said all there is to say
about the table, or is there still something else--something not a
sense-datum, something which persists when we go out of the room? Common
sense unhesitatingly answers that there is. What can be bought and sold
and pushed about and have a cloth laid on it, and so on, cannot be
a _mere_ collection of sense-data. If the cloth completely hides the
table, we shall derive no sense-data from the table, and therefore, if
the table were merely sense-data, it would have ceased to exist, and
the cloth would be suspended in empty air, resting, by a miracle, in
the place where the table formerly was. This seems plainly absurd; but
whoever wishes to become a philosopher must learn not to be frightened
by absurdities.

One great reason why it is felt that we must secure a physical object
in addition to the sense-data, is that we want the same object for
different people. When ten people are sitting round a dinner-table,
it seems preposterous to maintain that they are not seeing the same
tablecloth, the same knives and forks and spoons and glasses. But the
sense-data are private to each separate person; what is immediately
present to the sight of one is not immediately present to the sight of
another: they all see things from slightly different points of view, and
therefore see them slightly differently. Thus, if there are to be public
neutral objects, which can be in some sense known to many different
people, there must be something over and above the private and
particular sense-data which appear to various people. What reason, then,
have we for believing that there are such public neutral objects?

The first answer that naturally occurs to one is that, although
different people may see the table slightly differently, still they all
see more or less similar things when they look at the table, and
the variations in what they see follow the laws of perspective and
reflection of light, so that it is easy to arrive at a permanent object
underlying all the different people's sense-data. I bought my table from
the former occupant of my room; I could not buy _his_ sense-data,
which died when he went away, but I could and did buy the confident
expectation of more or less similar sense-data. Thus it is the fact that
different people have similar sense-data, and that one person in a given
place at different times has similar sense-data, which makes us suppose
that over and above the sense-data there is a permanent public object
which underlies or causes the sense-data of various people at various
times.

Now in so far as the above considerations depend upon supposing that
there are other people besides ourselves, they beg the very question at
issue. Other people are represented to me by certain sense-data, such as
the sight of them or the sound of their voices, and if I had no
reason to believe that there were physical objects independent of my
sense-data, I should have no reason to believe that other people exist
except as part of my dream. Thus, when we are trying to show that there
must be objects independent of our own sense-data, we cannot appeal to
the testimony of other people, since this testimony itself consists of
sense-data, and does not reveal other people's experiences unless our
own sense-data are signs of things existing independently of us. We must
therefore, if possible, find, in our own purely private experiences,
characteristics which show, or tend to show, that there are in the world
things other than ourselves and our private experiences.

In one sense it must be admitted that we can never prove the existence
of things other than ourselves and our experiences. No logical absurdity
results from the hypothesis that the world consists of myself and my
thoughts and feelings and sensations, and that everything else is mere
fancy. In dreams a very complicated world may seem to be present, and
yet on waking we find it was a delusion; that is to say, we find that
the sense-data in the dream do not appear to have corresponded with such
physical objects as we should naturally infer from our sense-data. (It
is true that, when the physical world is assumed, it is possible to
find physical causes for the sense-data in dreams: a door banging, for
instance, may cause us to dream of a naval engagement. But although, in
this case, there is a physical cause for the sense-data, there is not a
physical object corresponding to the sense-data in the way in which an
actual naval battle would correspond.) There is no logical impossibility
in the supposition that the whole of life is a dream, in which we
ourselves create all the objects that come before us. But although this
is not logically impossible, there is no reason whatever to suppose that
it is true; and it is, in fact, a less simple hypothesis, viewed as a
means of accounting for the facts of our own life, than the common-sense
hypothesis that there really are objects independent of us, whose action
on us causes our sensations.

The way in which simplicity comes in from supposing that there really
are physical objects is easily seen. If the cat appears at one moment in
one part of the room, and at another in another part, it is natural
to suppose that it has moved from the one to the other, passing over
a series of intermediate positions. But if it is merely a set of
sense-data, it cannot have ever been in any place where I did not see
it; thus we shall have to suppose that it did not exist at all while I
was not looking, but suddenly sprang into being in a new place. If
the cat exists whether I see it or not, we can understand from our own
experience how it gets hungry between one meal and the next; but if
it does not exist when I am not seeing it, it seems odd that appetite
should grow during non-existence as fast as during existence. And if the
cat consists only of sense-data, it cannot be hungry, since no hunger
but my own can be a sense-datum to me. Thus the behaviour of the
sense-data which represent the cat to me, though it seems quite natural
when regarded as an expression of hunger, becomes utterly inexplicable
when regarded as mere movements and changes of patches of colour, which
are as incapable of hunger as a triangle is of playing football.

But the difficulty in the case of the cat is nothing compared to the
difficulty in the case of human beings. When human beings speak--that
is, when we hear certain noises which we associate with ideas, and
simultaneously see certain motions of lips and expressions of face--it
is very difficult to suppose that what we hear is not the expression
of a thought, as we know it would be if we emitted the same sounds. Of
course similar things happen in dreams, where we are mistaken as to the
existence of other people. But dreams are more or less suggested by what
we call waking life, and are capable of being more or less accounted for
on scientific principles if we assume that there really is a physical
world. Thus every principle of simplicity urges us to adopt the natural
view, that there really are objects other than ourselves and our
sense-data which have an existence not dependent upon our perceiving
them.

Of course it is not by argument that we originally come by our belief in
an independent external world. We find this belief ready in ourselves as
soon as we begin to reflect: it is what may be called an _instinctive_
belief. We should never have been led to question this belief but for
the fact that, at any rate in the case of sight, it seems as if the
sense-datum itself were instinctively believed to be the independent
object, whereas argument shows that the object cannot be identical
with the sense-datum. This discovery, however--which is not at all
paradoxical in the case of taste and smell and sound, and only slightly
so in the case of touch--leaves undiminished our instinctive belief that
there _are_ objects _corresponding_ to our sense-data. Since this belief
does not lead to any difficulties, but on the contrary tends to simplify
and systematize our account of our experiences, there seems no good
reason for rejecting it. We may therefore admit--though with a slight
doubt derived from dreams--that the external world does really exist,
and is not wholly dependent for its existence upon our continuing to
perceive it.

The argument which has led us to this conclusion is doubtless less
strong than we could wish, but it is typical of many philosophical
arguments, and it is therefore worth while to consider briefly its
general character and validity. All knowledge, we find, must be built
up upon our instinctive beliefs, and if these are rejected, nothing
is left. But among our instinctive beliefs some are much stronger than
others, while many have, by habit and association, become entangled with
other beliefs, not really instinctive, but falsely supposed to be part
of what is believed instinctively.

Philosophy should show us the hierarchy of our instinctive beliefs,
beginning with those we hold most strongly, and presenting each as much
isolated and as free from irrelevant additions as possible. It should
take care to show that, in the form in which they are finally set forth,
our instinctive beliefs do not clash, but form a harmonious system.
There can never be any reason for rejecting one instinctive belief
except that it clashes with others; thus, if they are found to
harmonize, the whole system becomes worthy of acceptance.

It is of course _possible_ that all or any of our beliefs may be
mistaken, and therefore all ought to be held with at least some slight
element of doubt. But we cannot have _reason_ to reject a belief except
on the ground of some other belief. Hence, by organizing our instinctive
beliefs and their consequences, by considering which among them is most
possible, if necessary, to modify or abandon, we can arrive, on the
basis of accepting as our sole data what we instinctively believe, at an
orderly systematic organization of our knowledge, in which, though the
_possibility_ of error remains, its likelihood is diminished by the
interrelation of the parts and by the critical scrutiny which has
preceded acquiescence.

This function, at least, philosophy can perform. Most philosophers,
rightly or wrongly, believe that philosophy can do much more than
this--that it can give us knowledge, not otherwise attainable,
concerning the universe as a whole, and concerning the nature of
ultimate reality. Whether this be the case or not, the more modest
function we have spoken of can certainly be performed by philosophy, and
certainly suffices, for those who have once begun to doubt the adequacy
of common sense, to justify the arduous and difficult labours that
philosophical problems involve.



CHAPTER III. THE NATURE OF MATTER

In the preceding chapter we agreed, though without being able to
find demonstrative reasons, that it is rational to believe that our
sense-data--for example, those which we regard as associated with my
table--are really signs of the existence of something independent of us
and our perceptions. That is to say, over and above the sensations of
colour, hardness, noise, and so on, which make up the appearance of
the table to me, I assume that there is something else, of which these
things are appearances. The colour ceases to exist if I shut my eyes,
the sensation of hardness ceases to exist if I remove my arm from
contact with the table, the sound ceases to exist if I cease to rap the
table with my knuckles. But I do not believe that when all these things
cease the table ceases. On the contrary, I believe that it is because
the table exists continuously that all these sense-data will reappear
when I open my eyes, replace my arm, and begin again to rap with my
knuckles. The question we have to consider in this chapter is: What
is the nature of this real table, which persists independently of my
perception of it?

To this question physical science gives an answer, somewhat incomplete
it is true, and in part still very hypothetical, but yet deserving of
respect so far as it goes. Physical science, more or less unconsciously,
has drifted into the view that all natural phenomena ought to be reduced
to motions. Light and heat and sound are all due to wave-motions, which
travel from the body emitting them to the person who sees light or feels
heat or hears sound. That which has the wave-motion is either aether or
'gross matter', but in either case is what the philosopher would call
matter. The only properties which science assigns to it are position in
space, and the power of motion according to the laws of motion. Science
does not deny that it _may_ have other properties; but if so, such other
properties are not useful to the man of science, and in no way assist
him in explaining the phenomena.

It is sometimes said that 'light _is_ a form of wave-motion', but this
is misleading, for the light which we immediately see, which we know
directly by means of our senses, is _not_ a form of wave-motion, but
something quite different--something which we all know if we are not
blind, though we cannot describe it so as to convey our knowledge to a
man who is blind. A wave-motion, on the contrary, could quite well be
described to a blind man, since he can acquire a knowledge of space by
the sense of touch; and he can experience a wave-motion by a sea voyage
almost as well as we can. But this, which a blind man can understand, is
not what we mean by _light_: we mean by _light_ just that which a blind
man can never understand, and which we can never describe to him.

Now this something, which all of us who are not blind know, is not,
according to science, really to be found in the outer world: it is
something caused by the action of certain waves upon the eyes and nerves
and brain of the person who sees the light. When it is said that light
_is_ waves, what is really meant is that waves are the physical cause of
our sensations of light. But light itself, the thing which seeing people
experience and blind people do not, is not supposed by science to form
any part of the world that is independent of us and our senses. And very
similar remarks would apply to other kinds of sensations.

It is not only colours and sounds and so on that are absent from the
scientific world of matter, but also _space_ as we get it through sight
or touch. It is essential to science that its matter should be in _a_
space, but the space in which it is cannot be exactly the space we see
or feel. To begin with, space as we see it is not the same as space as
we get it by the sense of touch; it is only by experience in infancy
that we learn how to touch things we see, or how to get a sight of
things which we feel touching us. But the space of science is neutral as
between touch and sight; thus it cannot be either the space of touch or
the space of sight.

Again, different people see the same object as of different shapes,
according to their point of view. A circular coin, for example, though
we should always _judge_ it to be circular, will _look_ oval unless we
are straight in front of it. When we judge that it _is_ circular, we are
judging that it has a real shape which is not its apparent shape, but
belongs to it intrinsically apart from its appearance. But this real
shape, which is what concerns science, must be in a real space, not
the same as anybody's _apparent_ space. The real space is public, the
apparent space is private to the percipient. In different people's
_private_ spaces the same object seems to have different shapes; thus
the real space, in which it has its real shape, must be different from
the private spaces. The space of science, therefore, though _connected_
with the spaces we see and feel, is not identical with them, and the
manner of its connexion requires investigation.

We agreed provisionally that physical objects cannot be quite like
our sense-data, but may be regarded as _causing_ our sensations.
These physical objects are in the space of science, which we may call
'physical' space. It is important to notice that, if our sensations
are to be caused by physical objects, there must be a physical space
containing these objects and our sense-organs and nerves and brain. We
get a sensation of touch from an object when we are in contact with it;
that is to say, when some part of our body occupies a place in physical
space quite close to the space occupied by the object. We see an object
(roughly speaking) when no opaque body is between the object and our
eyes in physical space. Similarly, we only hear or smell or taste an
object when we are sufficiently near to it, or when it touches the
tongue, or has some suitable position in physical space relatively to
our body. We cannot begin to state what different sensations we shall
derive from a given object under different circumstances unless we
regard the object and our body as both in one physical space, for it is
mainly the relative positions of the object and our body that determine
what sensations we shall derive from the object.

Now our sense-data are situated in our private spaces, either the space
of sight or the space of touch or such vaguer spaces as other senses
may give us. If, as science and common sense assume, there is one public
all-embracing physical space in which physical objects are, the relative
positions of physical objects in physical space must more or less
correspond to the relative positions of sense-data in our private
spaces. There is no difficulty in supposing this to be the case. If we
see on a road one house nearer to us than another, our other senses will
bear out the view that it is nearer; for example, it will be reached
sooner if we walk along the road. Other people will agree that the house
which looks nearer to us is nearer; the ordnance map will take the
same view; and thus everything points to a spatial relation between the
houses corresponding to the relation between the sense-data which we see
when we look at the houses. Thus we may assume that there is a physical
space in which physical objects have spatial relations corresponding to
those which the corresponding sense-data have in our private spaces. It
is this physical space which is dealt with in geometry and assumed in
physics and astronomy.

Assuming that there is physical space, and that it does thus correspond
to private spaces, what can we know about it? We can know _only_ what is
required in order to secure the correspondence. That is to say, we can
know nothing of what it is like in itself, but we can know the sort
of arrangement of physical objects which results from their spatial
relations. We can know, for example, that the earth and moon and sun
are in one straight line during an eclipse, though we cannot know what
a physical straight line is in itself, as we know the look of a straight
line in our visual space. Thus we come to know much more about the
_relations_ of distances in physical space than about the distances
themselves; we may know that one distance is greater than another, or
that it is along the same straight line as the other, but we cannot have
that immediate acquaintance with physical distances that we have with
distances in our private spaces, or with colours or sounds or other
sense-data. We can know all those things about physical space which a
man born blind might know through other people about the space of sight;
but the kind of things which a man born blind could never know about the
space of sight we also cannot know about physical space. We can know the
properties of the relations required to preserve the correspondence with
sense-data, but we cannot know the nature of the terms between which the
relations hold.

With regard to time, our _feeling_ of duration or of the lapse of time
is notoriously an unsafe guide as to the time that has elapsed by the
clock. Times when we are bored or suffering pain pass slowly, times when
we are agreeably occupied pass quickly, and times when we are sleeping
pass almost as if they did not exist. Thus, in so far as time is
constituted by duration, there is the same necessity for distinguishing
a public and a private time as there was in the case of space. But in so
far as time consists in an _order_ of before and after, there is no need
to make such a distinction; the time-order which events seem to have is,
so far as we can see, the same as the time-order which they do have. At
any rate no reason can be given for supposing that the two orders are
not the same. The same is usually true of space: if a regiment of men
are marching along a road, the shape of the regiment will look different
from different points of view, but the men will appear arranged in the
same order from all points of view. Hence we regard the order as true
also in physical space, whereas the shape is only supposed to correspond
to the physical space so far as is required for the preservation of the
order.

In saying that the time-order which events seem to have is the same as
the time-order which they really have, it is necessary to guard against
a possible misunderstanding. It must not be supposed that the various
states of different physical objects have the same time-order as the
sense-data which constitute the perceptions of those objects. Considered
as physical objects, the thunder and lightning are simultaneous; that is
to say, the lightning is simultaneous with the disturbance of the air in
the place where the disturbance begins, namely, where the lightning
is. But the sense-datum which we call hearing the thunder does not take
place until the disturbance of the air has travelled as far as to where
we are. Similarly, it takes about eight minutes for the sun's light
to reach us; thus, when we see the sun we are seeing the sun of eight
minutes ago. So far as our sense-data afford evidence as to the physical
sun they afford evidence as to the physical sun of eight minutes ago; if
the physical sun had ceased to exist within the last eight minutes, that
would make no difference to the sense-data which we call 'seeing
the sun'. This affords a fresh illustration of the necessity of
distinguishing between sense-data and physical objects.

What we have found as regards space is much the same as what we find
in relation to the correspondence of the sense-data with their
physical counterparts. If one object looks blue and another red, we may
reasonably presume that there is some corresponding difference between
the physical objects; if two objects both look blue, we may presume a
corresponding similarity. But we cannot hope to be acquainted directly
with the quality in the physical object which makes it look blue or red.
Science tells us that this quality is a certain sort of wave-motion, and
this sounds familiar, because we think of wave-motions in the space we
see. But the wave-motions must really be in physical space, with which
we have no direct acquaintance; thus the real wave-motions have not that
familiarity which we might have supposed them to have. And what holds
for colours is closely similar to what holds for other sense-data. Thus
we find that, although the _relations_ of physical objects have all
sorts of knowable properties, derived from their correspondence with the
relations of sense-data, the physical objects themselves remain unknown
in their intrinsic nature, so far at least as can be discovered by means
of the senses. The question remains whether there is any other method of
discovering the intrinsic nature of physical objects.

The most natural, though not ultimately the most defensible, hypothesis
to adopt in the first instance, at any rate as regards visual
sense-data, would be that, though physical objects cannot, for the
reasons we have been considering, be _exactly_ like sense-data, yet they
may be more or less like. According to this view, physical objects will,
for example, really have colours, and we might, by good luck, see an
object as of the colour it really is. The colour which an object seems
to have at any given moment will in general be very similar, though
not quite the same, from many different points of view; we might thus
suppose the 'real' colour to be a sort of medium colour, intermediate
between the various shades which appear from the different points of
view.

Such a theory is perhaps not capable of being definitely refuted, but
it can be shown to be groundless. To begin with, it is plain that the
colour we see depends only upon the nature of the light-waves that
strike the eye, and is therefore modified by the medium intervening
between us and the object, as well as by the manner in which light is
reflected from the object in the direction of the eye. The intervening
air alters colours unless it is perfectly clear, and any strong
reflection will alter them completely. Thus the colour we see is a
result of the ray as it reaches the eye, and not simply a property of
the object from which the ray comes. Hence, also, provided certain waves
reach the eye, we shall see a certain colour, whether the object from
which the waves start has any colour or not. Thus it is quite gratuitous
to suppose that physical objects have colours, and therefore there is no
justification for making such a supposition. Exactly similar arguments
will apply to other sense-data.

It remains to ask whether there are any general philosophical arguments
enabling us to say that, if matter is real, it must be of such and such
a nature. As explained above, very many philosophers, perhaps most, have
held that whatever is real must be in some sense mental, or at any rate
that whatever we can know anything about must be in some sense mental.
Such philosophers are called 'idealists'. Idealists tell us that what
appears as matter is really something mental; namely, either (as Leibniz
held) more or less rudimentary minds, or (as Berkeley contended) ideas
in the minds which, as we should commonly say, 'perceive' the matter.
Thus idealists deny the existence of matter as something intrinsically
different from mind, though they do not deny that our sense-data are
signs of something which exists independently of our private sensations.
In the following chapter we shall consider briefly the reasons--in my
opinion fallacious--which idealists advance in favour of their theory.



CHAPTER IV. IDEALISM

The word 'idealism' is used by different philosophers in somewhat
different senses. We shall understand by it the doctrine that whatever
exists, or at any rate whatever can be known to exist, must be in
some sense mental. This doctrine, which is very widely held among
philosophers, has several forms, and is advocated on several different
grounds. The doctrine is so widely held, and so interesting in itself,
that even the briefest survey of philosophy must give some account of
it.

Those who are unaccustomed to philosophical speculation may be inclined
to dismiss such a doctrine as obviously absurd. There is no doubt that
common sense regards tables and chairs and the sun and moon and material
objects generally as something radically different from minds and the
contents of minds, and as having an existence which might continue if
minds ceased. We think of matter as having existed long before there
were any minds, and it is hard to think of it as a mere product of
mental activity. But whether true or false, idealism is not to be
dismissed as obviously absurd.

We have seen that, even if physical objects do have an independent
existence, they must differ very widely from sense-data, and can only
have a _correspondence_ with sense-data, in the same sort of way in
which a catalogue has a correspondence with the things catalogued. Hence
common sense leaves us completely in the dark as to the true intrinsic
nature of physical objects, and if there were good reason to regard them
as mental, we could not legitimately reject this opinion merely because
it strikes us as strange. The truth about physical objects _must_ be
strange. It may be unattainable, but if any philosopher believes that
he has attained it, the fact that what he offers as the truth is strange
ought not to be made a ground of objection to his opinion.

The grounds on which idealism is advocated are generally grounds derived
from the theory of knowledge, that is to say, from a discussion of the
conditions which things must satisfy in order that we may be able to
know them. The first serious attempt to establish idealism on such
grounds was that of Bishop Berkeley. He proved first, by arguments which
were largely valid, that our sense-data cannot be supposed to have an
existence independent of us, but must be, in part at least, 'in' the
mind, in the sense that their existence would not continue if there were
no seeing or hearing or touching or smelling or tasting. So far, his
contention was almost certainly valid, even if some of his arguments
were not so. But he went on to argue that sense-data were the only
things of whose existence our perceptions could assure us; and that
to be known is to be 'in' a mind, and therefore to be mental. Hence he
concluded that nothing can ever be known except what is in some mind,
and that whatever is known without being in my mind must be in some
other mind.

In order to understand his argument, it is necessary to understand his
use of the word 'idea'. He gives the name 'idea' to anything which
is _immediately_ known, as, for example, sense-data are known. Thus a
particular colour which we see is an idea; so is a voice which we hear,
and so on. But the term is not wholly confined to sense-data. There will
also be things remembered or imagined, for with such things also we have
immediate acquaintance at the moment of remembering or imagining. All
such immediate data he calls 'ideas'.

He then proceeds to consider common objects, such as a tree, for
instance. He shows that all we know immediately when we 'perceive' the
tree consists of ideas in his sense of the word, and he argues that
there is not the slightest ground for supposing that there is anything
real about the tree except what is perceived. Its being, he says,
consists in being perceived: in the Latin of the schoolmen its '_esse_'
is '_percipi_'. He fully admits that the tree must continue to exist
even when we shut our eyes or when no human being is near it. But this
continued existence, he says, is due to the fact that God continues to
perceive it; the 'real' tree, which corresponds to what we called the
physical object, consists of ideas in the mind of God, ideas more or
less like those we have when we see the tree, but differing in the fact
that they are permanent in God's mind so long as the tree continues
to exist. All our perceptions, according to him, consist in a
partial participation in God's perceptions, and it is because of this
participation that different people see more or less the same tree. Thus
apart from minds and their ideas there is nothing in the world, nor is
it possible that anything else should ever be known, since whatever is
known is necessarily an idea.

There are in this argument a good many fallacies which have been
important in the history of philosophy, and which it will be as well to
bring to light. In the first place, there is a confusion engendered by
the use of the word 'idea'. We think of an idea as essentially something
in somebody's mind, and thus when we are told that a tree consists
entirely of ideas, it is natural to suppose that, if so, the tree
must be entirely in minds. But the notion of being 'in' the mind is
ambiguous. We speak of bearing a person in mind, not meaning that the
person is in our minds, but that a thought of him is in our minds. When
a man says that some business he had to arrange went clean out of his
mind, he does not mean to imply that the business itself was ever in his
mind, but only that a thought of the business was formerly in his mind,
but afterwards ceased to be in his mind. And so when Berkeley says that
the tree must be in our minds if we can know it, all that he really has
a right to say is that a thought of the tree must be in our minds. To
argue that the tree itself must be in our minds is like arguing that a
person whom we bear in mind is himself in our minds. This confusion
may seem too gross to have been really committed by any competent
philosopher, but various attendant circumstances rendered it possible.
In order to see how it was possible, we must go more deeply into the
question as to the nature of ideas.

Before taking up the general question of the nature of ideas, we must
disentangle two entirely separate questions which arise concerning
sense-data and physical objects. We saw that, for various reasons of
detail, Berkeley was right in treating the sense-data which constitute
our perception of the tree as more or less subjective, in the sense that
they depend upon us as much as upon the tree, and would not exist if the
tree were not being perceived. But this is an entirely different point
from the one by which Berkeley seeks to prove that whatever can be
immediately known must be in a mind. For this purpose arguments of
detail as to the dependence of sense-data upon us are useless. It is
necessary to prove, generally, that by being known, things are shown to
be mental. This is what Berkeley believes himself to have done. It
is this question, and not our previous question as to the difference
between sense-data and the physical object, that must now concern us.

Taking the word 'idea' in Berkeley's sense, there are two quite distinct
things to be considered whenever an idea is before the mind. There is
on the one hand the thing of which we are aware--say the colour of my
table--and on the other hand the actual awareness itself, the mental act
of apprehending the thing. The mental act is undoubtedly mental, but is
there any reason to suppose that the thing apprehended is in any sense
mental? Our previous arguments concerning the colour did not prove it to
be mental; they only proved that its existence depends upon the relation
of our sense organs to the physical object--in our case, the table. That
is to say, they proved that a certain colour will exist, in a certain
light, if a normal eye is placed at a certain point relatively to
the table. They did not prove that the colour is in the mind of the
percipient.

Berkeley's view, that obviously the colour must be in the mind, seems
to depend for its plausibility upon confusing the thing apprehended
with the act of apprehension. Either of these might be called an 'idea';
probably either would have been called an idea by Berkeley. The act
is undoubtedly in the mind; hence, when we are thinking of the act,
we readily assent to the view that ideas must be in the mind. Then,
forgetting that this was only true when ideas were taken as acts of
apprehension, we transfer the proposition that 'ideas are in the mind'
to ideas in the other sense, i.e. to the things apprehended by our acts
of apprehension. Thus, by an unconscious equivocation, we arrive at the
conclusion that whatever we can apprehend must be in our minds. This
seems to be the true analysis of Berkeley's argument, and the ultimate
fallacy upon which it rests.

This question of the distinction between act and object in our
apprehending of things is vitally important, since our whole power of
acquiring knowledge is bound up with it. The faculty of being acquainted
with things other than itself is the main characteristic of a mind.
Acquaintance with objects essentially consists in a relation between the
mind and something other than the mind; it is this that constitutes the
mind's power of knowing things. If we say that the things known must be
in the mind, we are either unduly limiting the mind's power of knowing,
or we are uttering a mere tautology. We are uttering a mere tautology if
we mean by '_in_ the mind' the same as by '_before_ the mind', i.e. if
we mean merely being apprehended by the mind. But if we mean this, we
shall have to admit that what, _in this sense_, is in the mind,
may nevertheless be not mental. Thus when we realize the nature of
knowledge, Berkeley's argument is seen to be wrong in substance as well
as in form, and his grounds for supposing that 'ideas'--i.e. the objects
apprehended--must be mental, are found to have no validity whatever.
Hence his grounds in favour of idealism may be dismissed. It remains to
see whether there are any other grounds.

It is often said, as though it were a self-evident truism, that we
cannot know that anything exists which we do not know. It is inferred
that whatever can in any way be relevant to our experience must be at
least capable of being known by us; whence it follows that if matter
were essentially something with which we could not become acquainted,
matter would be something which we could not know to exist, and which
could have for us no importance whatever. It is generally also implied,
for reasons which remain obscure, that what can have no importance for
us cannot be real, and that therefore matter, if it is not composed of
minds or of mental ideas, is impossible and a mere chimaera.

To go into this argument fully at our present stage would be impossible,
since it raises points requiring a considerable preliminary discussion;
but certain reasons for rejecting the argument may be noticed at
once. To begin at the end: there is no reason why what cannot have any
_practical_ importance for us should not be real. It is true that,
if _theoretical_ importance is included, everything real is of _some_
importance to us, since, as persons desirous of knowing the truth about
the universe, we have some interest in everything that the universe
contains. But if this sort of interest is included, it is not the case
that matter has no importance for us, provided it exists even if we
cannot know that it exists. We can, obviously, suspect that it may
exist, and wonder whether it does; hence it is connected with our desire
for knowledge, and has the importance of either satisfying or thwarting
this desire.

Again, it is by no means a truism, and is in fact false, that we cannot
know that anything exists which we do not know. The word 'know' is here
used in two different senses. (1) In its first use it is applicable to
the sort of knowledge which is opposed to error, the sense in which
what we know is _true_, the sense which applies to our beliefs and
convictions, i.e. to what are called _judgements_. In this sense of the
word we know _that_ something is the case. This sort of knowledge may
be described as knowledge of _truths_. (2) In the second use of the word
'know' above, the word applies to our knowledge of _things_, which we
may call _acquaintance_. This is the sense in which we know sense-data.
(The distinction involved is roughly that between _savoir_ and
_connatre_ in French, or between _wissen_ and _kennen_ in German.)

Thus the statement which seemed like a truism becomes, when re-stated,
the following: 'We can never truly judge that something with which we
are not acquainted exists.' This is by no means a truism, but on the
contrary a palpable falsehood. I have not the honour to be acquainted
with the Emperor of China, but I truly judge that he exists. It may
be said, of course, that I judge this because of other people's
acquaintance with him. This, however, would be an irrelevant retort,
since, if the principle were true, I could not know that any one else
is acquainted with him. But further: there is no reason why I should not
know of the existence of something with which nobody is acquainted. This
point is important, and demands elucidation.

If I am acquainted with a thing which exists, my acquaintance gives
me the knowledge that it exists. But it is not true that, conversely,
whenever I can know that a thing of a certain sort exists, I or some one
else must be acquainted with the thing. What happens, in cases where I
have true judgement without acquaintance, is that the thing is known to
me by _description_, and that, in virtue of some general principle, the
existence of a thing answering to this description can be inferred
from the existence of something with which I am acquainted. In order
to understand this point fully, it will be well first to deal with
the difference between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by
description, and then to consider what knowledge of general principles,
if any, has the same kind of certainty as our knowledge of the existence
of our own experiences. These subjects will be dealt with in the
following chapters.



CHAPTER V. KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND KNOWLEDGE BY DESCRIPTION

In the preceding chapter we saw that there are two sorts of knowledge:
knowledge of things, and knowledge of truths. In this chapter we shall
be concerned exclusively with knowledge of things, of which in turn we
shall have to distinguish two kinds. Knowledge of things, when it is
of the kind we call knowledge by _acquaintance_, is essentially simpler
than any knowledge of truths, and logically independent of knowledge
of truths, though it would be rash to assume that human beings ever,
in fact, have acquaintance with things without at the same time knowing
some truth about them. Knowledge of things by _description_, on the
contrary, always involves, as we shall find in the course of the present
chapter, some knowledge of truths as its source and ground. But first of
all we must make clear what we mean by 'acquaintance' and what we mean
by 'description'.

We shall say that we have _acquaintance_ with anything of which we are
directly aware, without the intermediary of any process of inference
or any knowledge of truths. Thus in the presence of my table I am
acquainted with the sense-data that make up the appearance of my
table--its colour, shape, hardness, smoothness, etc.; all these are
things of which I am immediately conscious when I am seeing and touching
my table. The particular shade of colour that I am seeing may have many
things said about it--I may say that it is brown, that it is rather
dark, and so on. But such statements, though they make me know truths
about the colour, do not make me know the colour itself any better
than I did before so far as concerns knowledge of the colour itself, as
opposed to knowledge of truths about it, I know the colour perfectly and
completely when I see it, and no further knowledge of it itself is even
theoretically possible. Thus the sense-data which make up the
appearance of my table are things with which I have acquaintance, things
immediately known to me just as they are.

My knowledge of the table as a physical object, on the contrary, is not
direct knowledge. Such as it is, it is obtained through acquaintance
with the sense-data that make up the appearance of the table. We have
seen that it is possible, without absurdity, to doubt whether there is
a table at all, whereas it is not possible to doubt the sense-data. My
knowledge of the table is of the kind which we shall call 'knowledge
by description'. The table is 'the physical object which causes
such-and-such sense-data'. This describes the table by means of the
sense-data. In order to know anything at all about the table, we must
know truths connecting it with things with which we have acquaintance:
we must know that 'such-and-such sense-data are caused by a physical
object'. There is no state of mind in which we are directly aware of the
table; all our knowledge of the table is really knowledge of truths, and
the actual thing which is the table is not, strictly speaking, known
to us at all. We know a description, and we know that there is just one
object to which this description applies, though the object itself is
not directly known to us. In such a case, we say that our knowledge of
the object is knowledge by description.

All our knowledge, both knowledge of things and knowledge of truths,
rests upon acquaintance as its foundation. It is therefore important to
consider what kinds of things there are with which we have acquaintance.

Sense-data, as we have already seen, are among the things with which
we are acquainted; in fact, they supply the most obvious and striking
example of knowledge by acquaintance. But if they were the sole example,
our knowledge would be very much more restricted than it is. We should
only know what is now present to our senses: we could not know anything
about the past--not even that there was a past--nor could we know any
truths about our sense-data, for all knowledge of truths, as we shall
show, demands acquaintance with things which are of an essentially
different character from sense-data, the things which are sometimes
called 'abstract ideas', but which we shall call 'universals'. We have
therefore to consider acquaintance with other things besides sense-data
if we are to obtain any tolerably adequate analysis of our knowledge.

The first extension beyond sense-data to be considered is acquaintance
by _memory_. It is obvious that we often remember what we have seen or
heard or had otherwise present to our senses, and that in such cases we
are still immediately aware of what we remember, in spite of the fact
that it appears as past and not as present. This immediate knowledge by
memory is the source of all our knowledge concerning the past: without
it, there could be no knowledge of the past by inference, since we
should never know that there was anything past to be inferred.

The next extension to be considered is acquaintance by _introspection_.
We are not only aware of things, but we are often aware of being aware
of them. When I see the sun, I am often aware of my seeing the sun; thus
'my seeing the sun' is an object with which I have acquaintance. When
I desire food, I may be aware of my desire for food; thus 'my desiring
food' is an object with which I am acquainted. Similarly we may be
aware of our feeling pleasure or pain, and generally of the events which
happen in our minds. This kind of acquaintance, which may be called
self-consciousness, is the source of all our knowledge of mental things.
It is obvious that it is only what goes on in our own minds that can be
thus known immediately. What goes on in the minds of others is known
to us through our perception of their bodies, that is, through the
sense-data in us which are associated with their bodies. But for our
acquaintance with the contents of our own minds, we should be unable to
imagine the minds of others, and therefore we could never arrive at
the knowledge that they have minds. It seems natural to suppose that
self-consciousness is one of the things that distinguish men from
animals: animals, we may suppose, though they have acquaintance with
sense-data, never become aware of this acquaintance. I do not mean
that they _doubt_ whether they exist, but that they have never become
conscious of the fact that they have sensations and feelings, nor
therefore of the fact that they, the subjects of their sensations and
feelings, exist.

We have spoken of acquaintance with the contents of our minds as
_self_-consciousness, but it is not, of course, consciousness of our
_self_: it is consciousness of particular thoughts and feelings. The
question whether we are also acquainted with our bare selves, as opposed
to particular thoughts and feelings, is a very difficult one, upon which
it would be rash to speak positively. When we try to look into ourselves
we always seem to come upon some particular thought or feeling, and not
upon the 'I' which has the thought or feeling. Nevertheless there are
some reasons for thinking that we are acquainted with the 'I', though
the acquaintance is hard to disentangle from other things. To make clear
what sort of reason there is, let us consider for a moment what our
acquaintance with particular thoughts really involves.

When I am acquainted with 'my seeing the sun', it seems plain that I am
acquainted with two different things in relation to each other. On the
one hand there is the sense-datum which represents the sun to me, on the
other hand there is that which sees this sense-datum. All acquaintance,
such as my acquaintance with the sense-datum which represents the sun,
seems obviously a relation between the person acquainted and the object
with which the person is acquainted. When a case of acquaintance is one
with which I can be acquainted (as I am acquainted with my acquaintance
with the sense-datum representing the sun), it is plain that the person
acquainted is myself. Thus, when I am acquainted with my
seeing the sun, the whole fact with which I am acquainted is
'Self-acquainted-with-sense-datum'.

Further, we know the truth 'I am acquainted with this sense-datum'. It
is hard to see how we could know this truth, or even understand what is
meant by it, unless we were acquainted with something which we call 'I'.
It does not seem necessary to suppose that we are acquainted with a more
or less permanent person, the same to-day as yesterday, but it does seem
as though we must be acquainted with that thing, whatever its nature,
which sees the sun and has acquaintance with sense-data. Thus, in some
sense it would seem we must be acquainted with our Selves as opposed
to our particular experiences. But the question is difficult, and
complicated arguments can be adduced on either side. Hence, although
acquaintance with ourselves seems _probably_ to occur, it is not wise to
assert that it undoubtedly does occur.

We may therefore sum up as follows what has been said concerning
acquaintance with things that exist. We have acquaintance in sensation
with the data of the outer senses, and in introspection with the data of
what may be called the inner sense--thoughts, feelings, desires, etc.;
we have acquaintance in memory with things which have been data either
of the outer senses or of the inner sense. Further, it is probable,
though not certain, that we have acquaintance with Self, as that which
is aware of things or has desires towards things.

In addition to our acquaintance with particular existing things, we also
have acquaintance with what we shall call _universals_, that is to say,
general ideas, such as _whiteness_, _diversity_, _brotherhood_, and so
on. Every complete sentence must contain at least one word which stands
for a universal, since all verbs have a meaning which is universal. We
shall return to universals later on, in Chapter IX; for the present, it
is only necessary to guard against the supposition that whatever we can
be acquainted with must be something particular and existent. Awareness
of universals is called _conceiving_, and a universal of which we are
aware is called a _concept_.

It will be seen that among the objects with which we are acquainted
are not included physical objects (as opposed to sense-data), nor other
people's minds. These things are known to us by what I call 'knowledge
by description', which we must now consider.

By a 'description' I mean any phrase of the form 'a so-and-so' or
'the so-and-so'. A phrase of the form 'a so-and-so' I shall call an
'ambiguous' description; a phrase of the form 'the so-and-so' (in the
singular) I shall call a 'definite' description. Thus 'a man' is an
ambiguous description, and 'the man with the iron mask' is a definite
description. There are various problems connected with ambiguous
descriptions, but I pass them by, since they do not directly concern
the matter we are discussing, which is the nature of our knowledge
concerning objects in cases where we know that there is an object
answering to a definite description, though we are not acquainted with
any such object. This is a matter which is concerned exclusively with
definite descriptions. I shall therefore, in the sequel, speak simply of
'descriptions' when I mean 'definite descriptions'. Thus a description
will mean any phrase of the form 'the so-and-so' in the singular.

We shall say that an object is 'known by description' when we know that
it is 'the so-and-so', i.e. when we know that there is one object, and
no more, having a certain property; and it will generally be implied
that we do not have knowledge of the same object by acquaintance. We
know that the man with the iron mask existed, and many propositions
are known about him; but we do not know who he was. We know that the
candidate who gets the most votes will be elected, and in this case we
are very likely also acquainted (in the only sense in which one can
be acquainted with some one else) with the man who is, in fact, the
candidate who will get most votes; but we do not know which of the
candidates he is, i.e. we do not know any proposition of the form 'A is
the candidate who will get most votes' where A is one of the candidates
by name. We shall say that we have 'merely descriptive knowledge' of the
so-and-so when, although we know that the so-and-so exists, and although
we may possibly be acquainted with the object which is, in fact, the
so-and-so, yet we do not know any proposition '_a_ is the so-and-so',
where _a_ is something with which we are acquainted.

When we say 'the so-and-so exists', we mean that there is just one
object which is the so-and-so. The proposition '_a_ is the so-and-so'
means that _a_ has the property so-and-so, and nothing else has. 'Mr.
A. is the Unionist candidate for this constituency' means 'Mr. A. is
a Unionist candidate for this constituency, and no one else is'. 'The
Unionist candidate for this constituency exists' means 'some one is a
Unionist candidate for this constituency, and no one else is'. Thus,
when we are acquainted with an object which is the so-and-so, we know
that the so-and-so exists; but we may know that the so-and-so exists
when we are not acquainted with any object which we know to be the
so-and-so, and even when we are not acquainted with any object which, in
fact, is the so-and-so.

Common words, even proper names, are usually really descriptions. That
is to say, the thought in the mind of a person using a proper name
correctly can generally only be expressed explicitly if we replace the
proper name by a description. Moreover, the description required to
express the thought will vary for different people, or for the same
person at different times. The only thing constant (so long as the name
is rightly used) is the object to which the name applies. But so long as
this remains constant, the particular description involved usually makes
no difference to the truth or falsehood of the proposition in which the
name appears.

Let us take some illustrations. Suppose some statement made about
Bismarck. Assuming that there is such a thing as direct acquaintance
with oneself, Bismarck himself might have used his name directly to
designate the particular person with whom he was acquainted. In this
case, if he made a judgement about himself, he himself might be a
constituent of the judgement. Here the proper name has the direct use
which it always wishes to have, as simply standing for a certain object,
and not for a description of the object. But if a person who knew
Bismarck made a judgement about him, the case is different. What this
person was acquainted with were certain sense-data which he connected
(rightly, we will suppose) with Bismarck's body. His body, as a physical
object, and still more his mind, were only known as the body and the
mind connected with these sense-data. That is, they were known by
description. It is, of course, very much a matter af chance which
characteristics of a man's appearance will come into a friend's mind
when he thinks of him; thus the description actually in the friend's
mind is accidental. The essential point is that he knows that the
various descriptions all apply to the same entity, in spite of not being
acquainted with the entity in question.

When we, who did not know Bismarck, make a judgement about him, the
description in our minds will probably be some more or less vague mass
of historical knowledge--far more, in most cases, than is required to
identify him. But, for the sake of illustration, let us assume that we
think of him as 'the first Chancellor of the German Empire'. Here all
the words are abstract except 'German'. The word 'German' will, again,
have different meanings for different people. To some it will recall
travels in Germany, to some the look of Germany on the map, and so on.
But if we are to obtain a description which we know to be applicable,
we shall be compelled, at some point, to bring in a reference to a
particular with which we are acquainted. Such reference is involved in
any mention of past, present, and future (as opposed to definite dates),
or of here and there, or of what others have told us. Thus it would seem
that, in some way or other, a description known to be applicable to a
particular must involve some reference to a particular with which we
are acquainted, if our knowledge about the thing described is not to be
merely what follows _logically_ from the description. For example, 'the
most long-lived of men' is a description involving only universals,
which must apply to some man, but we can make no judgements concerning
this man which involve knowledge about him beyond what the description
gives. If, however, we say, 'The first Chancellor of the German Empire
was an astute diplomatist', we can only be assured of the truth of our
judgement in virtue of something with which we are acquainted--usually a
testimony heard or read. Apart from the information we convey to others,
apart from the fact about the actual Bismarck, which gives importance
to our judgement, the thought we really have contains the one or more
particulars involved, and otherwise consists wholly of concepts.

All names of places--London, England, Europe, the Earth, the Solar
System--similarly involve, when used, descriptions which start from some
one or more particulars with which we are acquainted. I suspect that
even the Universe, as considered by metaphysics, involves such a
connexion with particulars. In logic, on the contrary, where we are
concerned not merely with what does exist, but with whatever might or
could exist or be, no reference to actual particulars is involved.

It would seem that, when we make a statement about something only known
by description, we often _intend_ to make our statement, not in the form
involving the description, but about the actual thing described. That
is to say, when we say anything about Bismarck, we should like, if we
could, to make the judgement which Bismarck alone can make, namely,
the judgement of which he himself is a constituent. In this we are
necessarily defeated, since the actual Bismarck is unknown to us. But
we know that there is an object B, called Bismarck, and that B was an
astute diplomatist. We can thus _describe_ the proposition we should
like to affirm, namely, 'B was an astute diplomatist', where B is the
object which was Bismarck. If we are describing Bismarck as 'the first
Chancellor of the German Empire', the proposition we should like to
affirm may be described as 'the proposition asserting, concerning the
actual object which was the first Chancellor of the German Empire, that
this object was an astute diplomatist'. What enables us to communicate
in spite of the varying descriptions we employ is that we know there is
a true proposition concerning the actual Bismarck, and that however we
may vary the description (so long as the description is correct) the
proposition described is still the same. This proposition, which is
described and is known to be true, is what interests us; but we are not
acquainted with the proposition itself, and do not know it, though we
know it is true.

It will be seen that there are various stages in the removal from
acquaintance with particulars: there is Bismarck to people who knew him;
Bismarck to those who only know of him through history; the man with
the iron mask; the longest-lived of men. These are progressively further
removed from acquaintance with particulars; the first comes as near to
acquaintance as is possible in regard to another person; in the second,
we shall still be said to know 'who Bismarck was'; in the third, we do
not know who was the man with the iron mask, though we can know many
propositions about him which are not logically deducible from the fact
that he wore an iron mask; in the fourth, finally, we know nothing
beyond what is logically deducible from the definition of the man. There
is a similar hierarchy in the region of universals. Many universals,
like many particulars, are only known to us by description. But here,
as in the case of particulars, knowledge concerning what is known by
description is ultimately reducible to knowledge concerning what is
known by acquaintance.

The fundamental principle in the analysis of propositions containing
descriptions is this: _Every proposition which we can understand must be
composed wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted_.

We shall not at this stage attempt to answer all the objections which
may be urged against this fundamental principle. For the present, we
shall merely point out that, in some way or other, it must be possible
to meet these objections, for it is scarcely conceivable that we can
make a judgement or entertain a supposition without knowing what it is
that we are judging or supposing about. We must attach _some_ meaning
to the words we use, if we are to speak significantly and not utter mere
noise; and the meaning we attach to our words must be something with
which we are acquainted. Thus when, for example, we make a statement
about Julius Caesar, it is plain that Julius Caesar himself is not
before our minds, since we are not acquainted with him. We have in mind
some description of Julius Caesar: 'the man who was assassinated on the
Ides of March', 'the founder of the Roman Empire', or, perhaps, merely
'the man whose name was _Julius Caesar_'. (In this last description,
_Julius Caesar_ is a noise or shape with which we are acquainted.)
Thus our statement does not mean quite what it seems to mean, but means
something involving, instead of Julius Caesar, some description of him
which is composed wholly of particulars and universals with which we are
acquainted.

The chief importance of knowledge by description is that it enables us
to pass beyond the limits of our private experience. In spite of the
fact that we can only know truths which are wholly composed of terms
which we have experienced in acquaintance, we can yet have knowledge by
description of things which we have never experienced. In view of the
very narrow range of our immediate experience, this result is vital, and
until it is understood, much of our knowledge must remain mysterious and
therefore doubtful.



CHAPTER VI. ON INDUCTION

In almost all our previous discussions we have been concerned in
the attempt to get clear as to our data in the way of knowledge of
existence. What things are there in the universe whose existence is
known to us owing to our being acquainted with them? So far, our answer
has been that we are acquainted with our sense-data, and, probably,
with ourselves. These we know to exist. And past sense-data which
are remembered are known to have existed in the past. This knowledge
supplies our data.

But if we are to be able to draw inferences from these data--if we are
to know of the existence of matter, of other people, of the past before
our individual memory begins, or of the future, we must know general
principles of some kind by means of which such inferences can be drawn.
It must be known to us that the existence of some one sort of thing, A,
is a sign of the existence of some other sort of thing, B, either at
the same time as A or at some earlier or later time, as, for example,
thunder is a sign of the earlier existence of lightning. If this were
not known to us, we could never extend our knowledge beyond the
sphere of our private experience; and this sphere, as we have seen, is
exceedingly limited. The question we have now to consider is whether
such an extension is possible, and if so, how it is effected.

Let us take as an illustration a matter about which none of us, in fact,
feel the slightest doubt. We are all convinced that the sun will rise
to-morrow. Why? Is this belief a mere blind outcome of past experience,
or can it be justified as a reasonable belief? It is not easy to find
a test by which to judge whether a belief of this kind is reasonable or
not, but we can at least ascertain what sort of general beliefs would
suffice, if true, to justify the judgement that the sun will rise
to-morrow, and the many other similar judgements upon which our actions
are based.

It is obvious that if we are asked why we believe that the sun will rise
to-morrow, we shall naturally answer 'Because it always has risen every
day'. We have a firm belief that it will rise in the future, because it
has risen in the past. If we are challenged as to why we believe that
it will continue to rise as heretofore, we may appeal to the laws of
motion: the earth, we shall say, is a freely rotating body, and such
bodies do not cease to rotate unless something interferes from outside,
and there is nothing outside to interfere with the earth between now and
to-morrow. Of course it might be doubted whether we are quite certain
that there is nothing outside to interfere, but this is not the
interesting doubt. The interesting doubt is as to whether the laws
of motion will remain in operation until to-morrow. If this doubt is
raised, we find ourselves in the same position as when the doubt about
the sunrise was first raised.

The _only_ reason for believing that the laws of motion will remain in
operation is that they have operated hitherto, so far as our knowledge
of the past enables us to judge. It is true that we have a greater body
of evidence from the past in favour of the laws of motion than we have
in favour of the sunrise, because the sunrise is merely a particular
case of fulfilment of the laws of motion, and there are countless other
particular cases. But the real question is: Do _any_ number of cases
of a law being fulfilled in the past afford evidence that it will be
fulfilled in the future? If not, it becomes plain that we have no ground
whatever for expecting the sun to rise to-morrow, or for expecting the
bread we shall eat at our next meal not to poison us, or for any of the
other scarcely conscious expectations that control our daily lives. It
is to be observed that all such expectations are only _probable_; thus
we have not to seek for a proof that they _must_ be fulfilled, but
only for some reason in favour of the view that they are _likely_ to be
fulfilled.

Now in dealing with this question we must, to begin with, make an
important distinction, without which we should soon become involved
in hopeless confusions. Experience has shown us that, hitherto, the
frequent repetition of some uniform succession or coexistence has been a
_cause_ of our expecting the same succession or coexistence on the next
occasion. Food that has a certain appearance generally has a certain
taste, and it is a severe shock to our expectations when the familiar
appearance is found to be associated with an unusual taste. Things which
we see become associated, by habit, with certain tactile sensations
which we expect if we touch them; one of the horrors of a ghost (in
many ghost-stories) is that it fails to give us any sensations of touch.
Uneducated people who go abroad for the first time are so surprised as
to be incredulous when they find their native language not understood.

And this kind of association is not confined to men; in animals also it
is very strong. A horse which has been often driven along a certain
road resists the attempt to drive him in a different direction. Domestic
animals expect food when they see the person who usually feeds them. We
know that all these rather crude expectations of uniformity are liable
to be misleading. The man who has fed the chicken every day throughout
its life at last wrings its neck instead, showing that more refined
views as to the uniformity of nature would have been useful to the
chicken.

But in spite of the misleadingness of such expectations, they
nevertheless exist. The mere fact that something has happened a certain
number of times causes animals and men to expect that it will happen
again. Thus our instincts certainly cause us to believe that the sun
will rise to-morrow, but we may be in no better a position than the
chicken which unexpectedly has its neck wrung. We have therefore to
distinguish the fact that past uniformities _cause_ expectations as to
the future, from the question whether there is any reasonable ground for
giving weight to such expectations after the question of their validity
has been raised.

The problem we have to discuss is whether there is any reason for
believing in what is called 'the uniformity of nature'. The belief in
the uniformity of nature is the belief that everything that has happened
or will happen is an instance of some general law to which there are no
exceptions. The crude expectations which we have been considering are
all subject to exceptions, and therefore liable to disappoint those who
entertain them. But science habitually assumes, at least as a working
hypothesis, that general rules which have exceptions can be replaced by
general rules which have no exceptions. 'Unsupported bodies in air fall'
is a general rule to which balloons and aeroplanes are exceptions. But
the laws of motion and the law of gravitation, which account for the
fact that most bodies fall, also account for the fact that balloons and
aeroplanes can rise; thus the laws of motion and the law of gravitation
are not subject to these exceptions.

The belief that the sun will rise to-morrow might be falsified if the
earth came suddenly into contact with a large body which destroyed its
rotation; but the laws of motion and the law of gravitation would not
be infringed by such an event. The business of science is to find
uniformities, such as the laws of motion and the law of gravitation,
to which, so far as our experience extends, there are no exceptions.
In this search science has been remarkably successful, and it may be
conceded that such uniformities have held hitherto. This brings us back
to the question: Have we any reason, assuming that they have always held
in the past, to suppose that they will hold in the future?

It has been argued that we have reason to know that the future will
resemble the past, because what was the future has constantly become the
past, and has always been found to resemble the past, so that we really
have experience of the future, namely of times which were formerly
future, which we may call past futures. But such an argument really begs
the very question at issue. We have experience of past futures, but not
of future futures, and the question is: Will future futures resemble
past futures? This question is not to be answered by an argument which
starts from past futures alone. We have therefore still to seek for some
principle which shall enable us to know that the future will follow the
same laws as the past.

The reference to the future in this question is not essential. The same
question arises when we apply the laws that work in our experience to
past things of which we have no experience--as, for example, in geology,
or in theories as to the origin of the Solar System. The question we
really have to ask is: 'When two things have been found to be often
associated, and no instance is known of the one occurring without the
other, does the occurrence of one of the two, in a fresh instance, give
any good ground for expecting the other?' On our answer to this question
must depend the validity of the whole of our expectations as to the
future, the whole of the results obtained by induction, and in fact
practically all the beliefs upon which our daily life is based.

It must be conceded, to begin with, that the fact that two things have
been found often together and never apart does not, by itself, suffice
to _prove_ demonstratively that they will be found together in the next
case we examine. The most we can hope is that the oftener things are
found together, the more probable it becomes that they will be found
together another time, and that, if they have been found together often
enough, the probability will amount _almost_ to certainty. It can
never quite reach certainty, because we know that in spite of frequent
repetitions there sometimes is a failure at the last, as in the case
of the chicken whose neck is wrung. Thus probability is all we ought to
seek.

It might be urged, as against the view we are advocating, that we
know all natural phenomena to be subject to the reign of law, and that
sometimes, on the basis of observation, we can see that only one law
can possibly fit the facts of the case. Now to this view there are two
answers. The first is that, even if _some_ law which has no exceptions
applies to our case, we can never, in practice, be sure that we have
discovered that law and not one to which there are exceptions. The
second is that the reign of law would seem to be itself only probable,
and that our belief that it will hold in the future, or in unexamined
cases in the past, is itself based upon the very principle we are
examining.

The principle we are examining may be called the _principle of
induction_, and its two parts may be stated as follows:

(a) When a thing of a certain sort A has been found to be associated
with a thing of a certain other sort B, and has never been found
dissociated from a thing of the sort B, the greater the number of cases
in which A and B have been associated, the greater is the probability
that they will be associated in a fresh case in which one of them is
known to be present;

(b) Under the same circumstances, a sufficient number of cases of
association will make the probability of a fresh association nearly a
certainty, and will make it approach certainty without limit.

As just stated, the principle applies only to the verification of our
expectation in a single fresh instance. But we want also to know that
there is a probability in favour of the general law that things of the
sort A are _always_ associated with things of the sort B, provided a
sufficient number of cases of association are known, and no cases of
failure of association are known. The probability of the general law is
obviously less than the probability of the particular case, since if the
general law is true, the particular case must also be true, whereas
the particular case may be true without the general law being true.
Nevertheless the probability of the general law is increased by
repetitions, just as the probability of the particular case is. We may
therefore repeat the two parts of our principle as regards the general
law, thus:

(a) The greater the number of cases in which a thing of the sort A has
been found associated with a thing of the sort B, the more probable it
is (if no cases of failure of association are known) that A is always
associated with B;

b) Under the same circumstances, a sufficient number of cases of the
association of A with B will make it nearly certain that A is always
associated with B, and will make this general law approach certainty
without limit.

It should be noted that probability is always relative to certain data.
In our case, the data are merely the known cases of coexistence of A and
B. There may be other data, which _might_ be taken into account, which
would gravely alter the probability. For example, a man who had seen a
great many white swans might argue, by our principle, that on the
data it was _probable_ that all swans were white, and this might be a
perfectly sound argument. The argument is not disproved ny the fact that
some swans are black, because a thing may very well happen in spite of
the fact that some data render it improbable. In the case of the swans,
a man might know that colour is a very variable characteristic in many
species of animals, and that, therefore, an induction as to colour is
peculiarly liable to error. But this knowledge would be a fresh datum,
by no means proving that the probability relatively to our previous data
had been wrongly estimated. The fact, therefore, that things often fail
to fulfil our expectations is no evidence that our expectations will not
_probably_ be fulfilled in a given case or a given class of cases. Thus
our inductive principle is at any rate not capable of being _disproved_
by an appeal to experience.

The inductive principle, however, is equally incapable of being _proved_
by an appeal to experience. Experience might conceivably confirm
the inductive principle as regards the cases that have been already
examined; but as regards unexamined cases, it is the inductive principle
alone that can justify any inference from what has been examined to what
has not been examined. All arguments which, on the basis of experience,
argue as to the future or the unexperienced parts of the past or
present, assume the inductive principle; hence we can never use
experience to prove the inductive principle without begging the
question. Thus we must either accept the inductive principle on the
ground of its intrinsic evidence, or forgo all justification of our
expectations about the future. If the principle is unsound, we have no
reason to expect the sun to rise to-morrow, to expect bread to be more
nourishing than a stone, or to expect that if we throw ourselves off
the roof we shall fall. When we see what looks like our best friend
approaching us, we shall have no reason to suppose that his body is not
inhabited by the mind of our worst enemy or of some total stranger. All
our conduct is based upon associations which have worked in the past,
and which we therefore regard as likely to work in the future; and this
likelihood is dependent for its validity upon the inductive principle.

The general principles of science, such as the belief in the reign
of law, and the belief that every event must have a cause, are as
completely dependent upon the inductive principle as are the beliefs of
daily life All such general principles are believed because mankind have
found innumerable instances of their truth and no instances of their
falsehood. But this affords no evidence for their truth in the future,
unless the inductive principle is assumed.

Thus all knowledge which, on a basis of experience tells us something
about what is not experienced, is based upon a belief which experience
can neither confirm nor confute, yet which, at least in its more
concrete applications, appears to be as firmly rooted in us as many
of the facts of experience. The existence and justification of such
beliefs--for the inductive principle, as we shall see, is not the only
example--raises some of the most difficult and most debated problems of
philosophy. We will, in the next chapter, consider briefly what may be
said to account for such knowledge, and what is its scope and its degree
of certainty.



CHAPTER VII. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES

We saw in the preceding chapter that the principle of induction, while
necessary to the validity of all arguments based on experience,
is itself not capable of being proved by experience, and yet is
unhesitatingly believed by every one, at least in all its concrete
applications. In these characteristics the principle of induction does
not stand alone. There are a number of other principles which cannot be
proved or disproved by experience, but are used in arguments which start
from what is experienced.

Some of these principles have even greater evidence than the principle
of induction, and the knowledge of them has the same degree of certainty
as the knowledge of the existence of sense-data. They constitute the
means of drawing inferences from what is given in sensation; and if what
we infer is to be true, it is just as necessary that our principles
of inference should be true as it is that our data should be true. The
principles of inference are apt to be overlooked because of their
very obviousness--the assumption involved is assented to without our
realizing that it is an assumption. But it is very important to realize
the use of principles of inference, if a correct theory of knowledge
is to be obtained; for our knowledge of them raises interesting and
difficult questions.

In all our knowledge of general principles, what actually happens
is that first of all we realize some particular application of the
principle, and then we realize that the particularity is irrelevant, and
that there is a generality which may equally truly be affirmed. This is
of course familiar in such matters as teaching arithmetic: 'two and
two are four' is first learnt in the case of some particular pair of
couples, and then in some other particular case, and so on, until at
last it becomes possible to see that it is true of any pair of couples.
The same thing happens with logical principles. Suppose two men are
discussing what day of the month it is. One of them says, 'At least you
will admit that _if_ yesterday was the 15th to-day must be the 16th.'
'Yes', says the other, 'I admit that.' 'And you know', the first
continues, 'that yesterday was the 15th, because you dined with Jones,
and your diary will tell you that was on the 15th.' 'Yes', says the
second; 'therefore to-day _is_ the 16th.'

Now such an argument is not hard to follow; and if it is granted that
its premisses are true in fact, no one will deny that the conclusion
must also be true. But it depends for its truth upon an instance of a
general logical principle. The logical principle is as follows: 'Suppose
it known that _if_ this is true, then that is true. Suppose it also
known that this _is_ true, then it follows that that is true.' When it
is the case that if this is true, that is true, we shall say that this
'implies' that, and that that 'follows from' this. Thus our principle
states that if this implies that, and this is true, then that is true.
In other words, 'anything implied by a true proposition is true', or
'whatever follows from a true proposition is true'.

This principle is really involved--at least, concrete instances of it
are involved--in all demonstrations. Whenever one thing which we believe
is used to prove something else, which we consequently believe, this
principle is relevant. If any one asks: 'Why should I accept the results
of valid arguments based on true premisses?' we can only answer by
appealing to our principle. In fact, the truth of the principle is
impossible to doubt, and its obviousness is so great that at first sight
it seems almost trivial. Such principles, however, are not trivial to
the philosopher, for they show that we may have indubitable knowledge
which is in no way derived from objects of sense.

The above principle is merely one of a certain number of self-evident
logical principles. Some at least of these principles must be granted
before any argument or proof becomes possible. When some of them have
been granted, others can be proved, though these others, so long as they
are simple, are just as obvious as the principles taken for granted. For
no very good reason, three of these principles have been singled out by
tradition under the name of 'Laws of Thought'.

They are as follows:

(1) _The law of identity_: 'Whatever is, is.'

(2) _The law of contradiction_: 'Nothing can both be and not be.'

(3) _The law of excluded middle_: 'Everything must either be or not be.'

These three laws are samples of self-evident logical principles, but
are not really more fundamental or more self-evident than various other
similar principles: for instance, the one we considered just now, which
states that what follows from a true premiss is true. The name 'laws of
thought' is also misleading, for what is important is not the fact that
we think in accordance with these laws, but the fact that things behave
in accordance with them; in other words, the fact that when we think in
accordance with them we think _truly_. But this is a large question, to
which we must return at a later stage.

In addition to the logical principles which enable us to prove from
a given premiss that something is _certainly_ true, there are other
logical principles which enable us to prove, from a given premiss,
that there is a greater or less probability that something is true. An
example of such principles--perhaps the most important example is the
inductive principle, which we considered in the preceding chapter.

One of the great historic controversies in philosophy is the controversy
between the two schools called respectively 'empiricists' and
'rationalists'. The empiricists--who are best represented by the
British philosophers, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume--maintained that all
our knowledge is derived from experience; the rationalists--who are
represented by the Continental philosophers of the seventeenth century,
especially Descartes and Leibniz--maintained that, in addition to what
we know by experience, there are certain 'innate ideas' and 'innate
principles', which we know independently of experience. It has now
become possible to decide with some confidence as to the truth or
falsehood of these opposing schools. It must be admitted, for the
reasons already stated, that logical principles are known to us, and
cannot be themselves proved by experience, since all proof presupposes
them. In this, therefore, which was the most important point of the
controversy, the rationalists were in the right.

On the other hand, even that part of our knowledge which is _logically_
independent of experience (in the sense that experience cannot prove
it) is yet elicited and caused by experience. It is on occasion of
particular experiences that we become aware of the general laws which
their connexions exemplify. It would certainly be absurd to suppose that
there are innate principles in the sense that babies are born with a
knowledge of everything which men know and which cannot be deduced from
what is experienced. For this reason, the word 'innate' would not now be
employed to describe our knowledge of logical principles. The phrase
'_a priori_' is less objectionable, and is more usual in modern writers.
Thus, while admitting that all knowledge is elicited and caused by
experience, we shall nevertheless hold that some knowledge is _a
priori_, in the sense that the experience which makes us think of it
does not suffice to prove it, but merely so directs our attention that
we see its truth without requiring any proof from experience.

There is another point of great importance, in which the empiricists
were in the right as against the rationalists. Nothing can be known to
_exist_ except by the help of experience. That is to say, if we wish to
prove that something of which we have no direct experience exists, we
must have among our premisses the existence of one or more things of
which we have direct experience. Our belief that the Emperor of China
exists, for example, rests upon testimony, and testimony consists,
in the last analysis, of sense-data seen or heard in reading or being
spoken to. Rationalists believed that, from general consideration as
to what must be, they could deduce the existence of this or that in the
actual world. In this belief they seem to have been mistaken. All the
knowledge that we can acquire _a priori_ concerning existence seems
to be hypothetical: it tells us that if one thing exists, another must
exist, or, more generally, that if one proposition is true, another must
be true. This is exemplified by the principles we have already dealt
with, such as '_if_ this is true, and this implies that, then that is
true', or '_if_ this and that have been repeatedly found connected, they
will probably be connected in the next instance in which one of them is
found'. Thus the scope and power of _a priori_ principles is strictly
limited. All knowledge that something exists must be in part dependent
on experience. When anything is known immediately, its existence is
known by experience alone; when anything is proved to exist, without
being known immediately, both experience and _a priori_ principles must
be required in the proof. Knowledge is called _empirical_ when it rests
wholly or partly upon experience. Thus all knowledge which asserts
existence is empirical, and the only _a priori_ knowledge concerning
existence is hypothetical, giving connexions among things that exist or
may exist, but not giving actual existence.

_A priori_ knowledge is not all of the logical kind we have been
hitherto considering. Perhaps the most important example of non-logical
_a priori_ knowledge is knowledge as to ethical value. I am not speaking
of judgements as to what is useful or as to what is virtuous, for such
judgements do require empirical premisses; I am speaking of judgements
as to the intrinsic desirability of things. If something is useful, it
must be useful because it secures some end; the end must, if we have
gone far enough, be valuable on its own account, and not merely because
it is useful for some further end. Thus all judgements as to what is
useful depend upon judgements as to what has value on its own account.

We judge, for example, that happiness is more desirable than misery,
knowledge than ignorance, goodwill than hatred, and so on. Such
judgements must, in part at least, be immediate and _a priori_. Like our
previous _a priori_ judgements, they may be elicited by experience, and
indeed they must be; for it seems not possible to judge whether anything
is intrinsically valuable unless we have experienced something of
the same kind. But it is fairly obvious that they cannot be proved by
experience; for the fact that a thing exists or does not exist cannot
prove either that it is good that it should exist or that it is bad. The
pursuit of this subject belongs to ethics, where the impossibility of
deducing what ought to be from what is has to be established. In the
present connexion, it is only important to realize that knowledge as to
what is intrinsically of value is _a priori_ in the same sense in
which logic is _a priori_, namely in the sense that the truth of such
knowledge can be neither proved nor disproved by experience.

All pure mathematics is _a priori_, like logic. This was strenuously
denied by the empirical philosophers, who maintained that experience was
as much the source of our knowledge of arithmetic as of our knowledge of
geography. They maintained that by the repeated experience of seeing two
things and two other things, and finding that altogether they made four
things, we were led by induction to the conclusion that two things
and two other things would _always_ make four things altogether. If,
however, this were the source of our knowledge that two and two are
four, we should proceed differently, in persuading ourselves of its
truth, from the way in which we do actually proceed. In fact, a certain
number of instances are needed to make us think of two abstractly,
rather than of two coins or two books or two people, or two of any other
specified kind. But as soon as we are able to divest our thoughts of
irrelevant particularity, we become able to see the general principle
that two and two are four; any one instance is seen to be _typical_, and
the examination of other instances becomes unnecessary.(1)

(1) Cf. A. N. Whitehead, _Introduction to Mathematics_ (Home University
Library).

The same thing is exemplified in geometry. If we want to prove some
property of _all_ triangles, we draw some one triangle and reason about
it; but we can avoid making use of any property which it does not share
with all other triangles, and thus, from our particular case, we obtain
a general result. We do not, in fact, feel our certainty that two and
two are four increased by fresh instances, because, as soon as we have
seen the truth of this proposition, our certainty becomes so great as
to be incapable of growing greater. Moreover, we feel some quality of
necessity about the proposition 'two and two are four', which is
absent from even the best attested empirical generalizations. Such
generalizations always remain mere facts: we feel that there might be a
world in which they were false, though in the actual world they happen
to be true. In any possible world, on the contrary, we feel that two
and two would be four: this is not a mere fact, but a necessity to which
everything actual and possible must conform.

The case may be made clearer by considering a genuinely-empirical
generalization, such as 'All men are mortal.' It is plain that we
believe this proposition, in the first place, because there is no known
instance of men living beyond a certain age, and in the second place
because there seem to be physiological grounds for thinking that an
organism such as a man's body must sooner or later wear out. Neglecting
the second ground, and considering merely our experience of men's
mortality, it is plain that we should not be content with one quite
clearly understood instance of a man dying, whereas, in the case of 'two
and two are four', one instance does suffice, when carefully considered,
to persuade us that the same must happen in any other instance. Also
we can be forced to admit, on reflection, that there may be some doubt,
however slight, as to whether _all_ men are mortal. This may be made
plain by the attempt to imagine two different worlds, in one of which
there are men who are not mortal, while in the other two and two make
five. When Swift invites us to consider the race of Struldbugs who never
die, we are able to acquiesce in imagination. But a world where two
and two make five seems quite on a different level. We feel that such a
world, if there were one, would upset the whole fabric of our knowledge
and reduce us to utter doubt.

The fact is that, in simple mathematical judgements such as 'two and two
are four', and also in many judgements of logic, we can know the general
proposition without inferring it from instances, although some instance
is usually necessary to make clear to us what the general proposition
means. This is why there is real utility in the process of _deduction_,
which goes from the general to the general, or from the general to the
particular, as well as in the process of _induction_, which goes from
the particular to the particular, or from the particular to the general.
It is an old debate among philosophers whether deduction ever gives
_new_ knowledge. We can now see that in certain cases, at least, it does
do so. If we already know that two and two always make four, and we
know that Brown and Jones are two, and so are Robinson and Smith, we can
deduce that Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are four. This is
new knowledge, not contained in our premisses, because the general
proposition, 'two and two are four', never told us there were such
people as Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith, and the particular
premisses do not tell us that there were four of them, whereas the
particular proposition deduced does tell us both these things.

But the newness of the knowledge is much less certain if we take the
stock instance of deduction that is always given in books on logic,
namely, 'All men are mortal; Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is
mortal.' In this case, what we really know beyond reasonable doubt is
that certain men, A, B, C, were mortal, since, in fact, they have died.
If Socrates is one of these men, it is foolish to go the roundabout way
through 'all men are mortal' to arrive at the conclusion that _probably_
Socrates is mortal. If Socrates is not one of the men on whom our
induction is based, we shall still do better to argue straight from our
A, B, C, to Socrates, than to go round by the general proposition, 'all
men are mortal'. For the probability that Socrates is mortal is greater,
on our data, than the probability that all men are mortal. (This is
obvious, because if all men are mortal, so is Socrates; but if Socrates
is mortal, it does not follow that all men are mortal.) Hence we shall
reach the conclusion that Socrates is mortal with a greater approach to
certainty if we make our argument purely inductive than if we go by way
of 'all men are mortal' and then use deduction.

This illustrates the difference between general propositions known _a
priori_ such as 'two and two are four', and empirical generalizations
such as 'all men are mortal'. In regard to the former, deduction is the
right mode of argument, whereas in regard to the latter, induction is
always theoretically preferable, and warrants a greater confidence in
the truth of our conclusion, because all empirical generalizations are
more uncertain than the instances of them.

We have now seen that there are propositions known _a priori_, and that
among them are the propositions of logic and pure mathematics, as well
as the fundamental propositions of ethics. The question which must
next occupy us is this: How is it possible that there should be such
knowledge? And more particularly, how can there be knowledge of general
propositions in cases where we have not examined all the instances, and
indeed never can examine them all, because their number is infinite?
These questions, which were first brought prominently forward by
the German philosopher Kant (1724-1804), are very difficult, and
historically very important.



CHAPTER VIII. HOW _A PRIORI_ KNOWLEDGE IS POSSIBLE

Immanuel Kant is generally regarded as the greatest of the modern
philosophers. Though he lived through the Seven Years War and the
French Revolution, he never interrupted his teaching of philosophy at
Knigsberg in East Prussia. His most distinctive contribution was the
invention of what he called the 'critical' philosophy, which, assuming
as a datum that there is knowledge of various kinds, inquired how such
knowledge comes to be possible, and deduced, from the answer to this
inquiry, many metaphysical results as to the nature of the world.
Whether these results were valid may well be doubted. But Kant
undoubtedly deserves credit for two things: first, for having perceived
that we have _a priori_ knowledge which is not purely 'analytic', i.e.
such that the opposite would be self-contradictory, and secondly,
for having made evident the philosophical importance of the theory of
knowledge.

Before the time of Kant, it was generally held that whatever knowledge
was _a priori_ must be 'analytic'. What this word means will be best
illustrated by examples. If I say, 'A bald man is a man', 'A plane
figure is a figure', 'A bad poet is a poet', I make a purely analytic
judgement: the subject spoken about is given as having at least two
properties, of which one is singled out to be asserted of it. Such
propositions as the above are trivial, and would never be enunciated
in real life except by an orator preparing the way for a piece of
sophistry. They are called 'analytic' because the predicate is obtained
by merely analysing the subject. Before the time of Kant it was thought
that all judgements of which we could be certain _a priori_ were of this
kind: that in all of them there was a predicate which was only part
of the subject of which it was asserted. If this were so, we should be
involved in a definite contradiction if we attempted to deny anything
that could be known _a priori_. 'A bald man is not bald' would assert
and deny baldness of the same man, and would therefore contradict
itself. Thus according to the philosophers before Kant, the law of
contradiction, which asserts that nothing can at the same time have and
not have a certain property, sufficed to establish the truth of all _a
priori_ knowledge.

Hume (1711-76), who preceded Kant, accepting the usual view as to what
makes knowledge _a priori_, discovered that, in many cases which had
previously been supposed analytic, and notably in the case of cause and
effect, the connexion was really synthetic. Before Hume, rationalists at
least had supposed that the effect could be logically deduced from the
cause, if only we had sufficient knowledge. Hume argued--correctly, as
would now be generally admitted--that this could not be done. Hence he
inferred the far more doubtful proposition that nothing could be known
_a priori_ about the connexion of cause and effect. Kant, who had been
educated in the rationalist tradition, was much perturbed by Hume's
scepticism, and endeavoured to find an answer to it. He perceived that
not only the connexion of cause and effect, but all the propositions
of arithmetic and geometry, are 'synthetic', i.e. not analytic: in
all these propositions, no analysis of the subject will reveal the
predicate. His stock instance was the proposition 7 + 5 = 12. He pointed
out, quite truly, that 7 and 5 have to be put together to give 12: the
idea of 12 is not contained in them, nor even in the idea of adding them
together. Thus he was led to the conclusion that all pure mathematics,
though _a priori_, is synthetic; and this conclusion raised a new
problem of which he endeavoured to find the solution.

The question which Kant put at the beginning of his philosophy, namely
'How is pure mathematics possible?' is an interesting and difficult one,
to which every philosophy which is not purely sceptical must find
some answer. The answer of the pure empiricists, that our mathematical
knowledge is derived by induction from particular instances, we have
already seen to be inadequate, for two reasons: first, that the validity
of the inductive principle itself cannot be proved by induction;
secondly, that the general propositions of mathematics, such as 'two
and two always make four', can obviously be known with certainty by
consideration of a single instance, and gain nothing by enumeration of
other cases in which they have been found to be true. Thus our knowledge
of the general propositions of mathematics (and the same applies to
logic) must be accounted for otherwise than our (merely probable)
knowledge of empirical generalizations such as 'all men are mortal'.

The problem arises through the fact that such knowledge is general,
whereas all experience is particular. It seems strange that we should
apparently be able to know some truths in advance about particular
things of which we have as yet no experience; but it cannot easily be
doubted that logic and arithmetic will apply to such things. We do not
know who will be the inhabitants of London a hundred years hence; but
we know that any two of them and any other two of them will make four of
them. This apparent power of anticipating facts about things of which
we have no experience is certainly surprising. Kant's solution of the
problem, though not valid in my opinion, is interesting. It is, however,
very difficult, and is differently understood by different philosophers.
We can, therefore, only give the merest outline of it, and even that
will be thought misleading by many exponents of Kant's system.

What Kant maintained was that in all our experience there are two
elements to be distinguished, the one due to the object (i.e. to what we
have called the 'physical object'), the other due to our own nature. We
saw, in discussing matter and sense-data, that the physical object is
different from the associated sense-data, and that the sense-data are to
be regarded as resulting from an interaction between the physical
object and ourselves. So far, we are in agreement with Kant. But what
is distinctive of Kant is the way in which he apportions the shares of
ourselves and the physical object respectively. He considers that the
crude material given in sensation--the colour, hardness, etc.--is due
to the object, and that what we supply is the arrangement in space
and time, and all the relations between sense-data which result from
comparison or from considering one as the cause of the other or in any
other way. His chief reason in favour of this view is that we seem
to have _a priori_ knowledge as to space and time and causality and
comparison, but not as to the actual crude material of sensation. We can
be sure, he says, that anything we shall ever experience must show the
characteristics affirmed of it in our _a priori_ knowledge, because
these characteristics are due to our own nature, and therefore
nothing can ever come into our experience without acquiring these
characteristics.

The physical object, which he calls the 'thing in itself',(1) he regards
as essentially unknowable; what can be known is the object as we have it
in experience, which he calls the 'phenomenon'. The phenomenon, being
a joint product of us and the thing in itself, is sure to have those
characteristics which are due to us, and is therefore sure to conform
to our _a priori_ knowledge. Hence this knowledge, though true of all
actual and possible experience, must not be supposed to apply outside
experience. Thus in spite of the existence of _a priori_ knowledge, we
cannot know anything about the thing in itself or about what is not
an actual or possible object of experience. In this way he tries to
reconcile and harmonize the contentions of the rationalists with the
arguments of the empiricists.

(1) Kant's 'thing in itself' is identical in _definition_ with
the physical object, namely, it is the cause of sensations. In the
properties deduced from the definition it is not identical, since Kant
held (in spite of some inconsistency as regards cause) that we can know
that none of the categories are applicable to the 'thing in itself'.

Apart from minor grounds on which Kant's philosophy may be criticized,
there is one main objection which seems fatal to any attempt to deal
with the problem of _a priori_ knowledge by his method. The thing to
be accounted for is our certainty that the facts must always conform to
logic and arithmetic. To say that logic and arithmetic are contributed
by us does not account for this. Our nature is as much a fact of the
existing world as anything, and there can be no certainty that it will
remain constant. It might happen, if Kant is right, that to-morrow
our nature would so change as to make two and two become five. This
possibility seems never to have occurred to him, yet it is one which
utterly destroys the certainty and universality which he is anxious
to vindicate for arithmetical propositions. It is true that this
possibility, formally, is inconsistent with the Kantian view that time
itself is a form imposed by the subject upon phenomena, so that our
real Self is not in time and has no to-morrow. But he will still have
to suppose that the time-order of phenomena is determined by
characteristics of what is behind phenomena, and this suffices for the
substance of our argument.

Reflection, moreover, seems to make it clear that, if there is any truth
in our arithmetical beliefs, they must apply to things equally whether
we think of them or not. Two physical objects and two other physical
objects must make four physical objects, even if physical objects cannot
be experienced. To assert this is certainly within the scope of what
we mean when we state that two and two are four. Its truth is just as
indubitable as the truth of the assertion that two phenomena and two
other phenomena make four phenomena. Thus Kant's solution unduly limits
the scope of _a priori_ propositions, in addition to failing in the
attempt at explaining their certainty.

Apart from the special doctrines advocated by Kant, it is very common
among philosophers to regard what is _a priori_ as in some sense mental,
as concerned rather with the way we must think than with any fact of
the outer world. We noted in the preceding chapter the three principles
commonly called 'laws of thought'. The view which led to their being so
named is a natural one, but there are strong reasons for thinking
that it is erroneous. Let us take as an illustration the law of
contradiction. This is commonly stated in the form 'Nothing can both be
and not be', which is intended to express the fact that nothing can at
once have and not have a given quality. Thus, for example, if a tree
is a beech it cannot also be not a beech; if my table is rectangular it
cannot also be not rectangular, and so on.

Now what makes it natural to call this principle a law of _thought_
is that it is by thought rather than by outward observation that we
persuade ourselves of its necessary truth. When we have seen that a tree
is a beech, we do not need to look again in order to ascertain whether
it is also not a beech; thought alone makes us know that this is
impossible. But the conclusion that the law of contradiction is a law
of _thought_ is nevertheless erroneous. What we believe, when we believe
the law of contradiction, is not that the mind is so made that it must
believe the law of contradiction. _This_ belief is a subsequent result
of psychological reflection, which presupposes the belief in the law of
contradiction. The belief in the law of contradiction is a belief about
things, not only about thoughts. It is not, e.g., the belief that if we
_think_ a certain tree is a beech, we cannot at the same time _think_
that it is not a beech; it is the belief that if the tree _is_ a
beech, it cannot at the same time _be_ not a beech. Thus the law of
contradiction is about things, and not merely about thoughts; and
although belief in the law of contradiction is a thought, the law of
contradiction itself is not a thought, but a fact concerning the things
in the world. If this, which we believe when we believe the law of
contradiction, were not true of the things in the world, the fact
that we were compelled to _think_ it true would not save the law of
contradiction from being false; and this shows that the law is not a law
of _thought_.

A similar argument applies to any other _a priori_ judgement. When we
judge that two and two are four, we are not making a judgement about our
thoughts, but about all actual or possible couples. The fact that our
minds are so constituted as to believe that two and two are four, though
it is true, is emphatically not what we assert when we assert that two
and two are four. And no fact about the constitution of our minds could
make it _true_ that two and two are four. Thus our _a priori_ knowledge,
if it is not erroneous, is not merely knowledge about the constitution
of our minds, but is applicable to whatever the world may contain, both
what is mental and what is non-mental.

The fact seems to be that all our _a priori_ knowledge is concerned with
entities which do not, properly speaking, _exist_, either in the mental
or in the physical world. These entities are such as can be named by
parts of speech which are not substantives; they are such entities as
qualities and relations. Suppose, for instance, that I am in my room. I
exist, and my room exists; but does 'in' exist? Yet obviously the word
'in' has a meaning; it denotes a relation which holds between me and my
room. This relation is something, although we cannot say that it exists
_in the same sense_ in which I and my room exist. The relation 'in' is
something which we can think about and understand, for, if we could not
understand it, we could not understand the sentence 'I am in my room'.
Many philosophers, following Kant, have maintained that relations are
the work of the mind, that things in themselves have no relations,
but that the mind brings them together in one act of thought and thus
produces the relations which it judges them to have.

This view, however, seems open to objections similar to those which we
urged before against Kant. It seems plain that it is not thought which
produces the truth of the proposition 'I am in my room'. It may be true
that an earwig is in my room, even if neither I nor the earwig nor any
one else is aware of this truth; for this truth concerns only the earwig
and the room, and does not depend upon anything else. Thus relations, as
we shall see more fully in the next chapter, must be placed in a world
which is neither mental nor physical. This world is of great importance
to philosophy, and in particular to the problems of _a priori_
knowledge. In the next chapter we shall proceed to develop its nature
and its bearing upon the questions with which we have been dealing.



CHAPTER IX. THE WORLD OF UNIVERSALS

At the end of the preceding chapter we saw that such entities as
relations appear to have a being which is in some way different from
that of physical objects, and also different from that of minds and from
that of sense-data. In the present chapter we have to consider what is
the nature of this kind of being, and also what objects there are that
have this kind of being. We will begin with the latter question.

The problem with which we are now concerned is a very old one, since it
was brought into philosophy by Plato. Plato's 'theory of ideas' is an
attempt to solve this very problem, and in my opinion it is one of the
most successful attempts hitherto made. The theory to be advocated in
what follows is largely Plato's, with merely such modifications as time
has shown to be necessary.

The way the problem arose for Plato was more or less as follows. Let
us consider, say, such a notion as _justice_. If we ask ourselves what
justice is, it is natural to proceed by considering this, that, and the
other just act, with a view to discovering what they have in common.
They must all, in some sense, partake of a common nature, which will be
found in whatever is just and in nothing else. This common nature, in
virtue of which they are all just, will be justice itself, the pure
essence the admixture of which with facts of ordinary life produces the
multiplicity of just acts. Similarly with any other word which may be
applicable to common facts, such as 'whiteness' for example. The word
will be applicable to a number of particular things because they all
participate in a common nature or essence. This pure essence is what
Plato calls an 'idea' or 'form'. (It must not be supposed that 'ideas',
in his sense, exist in minds, though they may be apprehended by minds.)
The 'idea' _justice_ is not identical with anything that is just: it is
something other than particular things, which particular things partake
of. Not being particular, it cannot itself exist in the world of sense.
Moreover it is not fleeting or changeable like the things of sense: it
is eternally itself, immutable and indestructible.

Thus Plato is led to a supra-sensible world, more real than the common
world of sense, the unchangeable world of ideas, which alone gives to
the world of sense whatever pale reflection of reality may belong to it.
The truly real world, for Plato, is the world of ideas; for whatever
we may attempt to say about things in the world of sense, we can only
succeed in saying that they participate in such and such ideas, which,
therefore, constitute all their character. Hence it is easy to pass
on into a mysticism. We may hope, in a mystic illumination, to see the
ideas as we see objects of sense; and we may imagine that the ideas
exist in heaven. These mystical developments are very natural, but the
basis of the theory is in logic, and it is as based in logic that we
have to consider it.

The word 'idea' has acquired, in the course of time, many associations
which are quite misleading when applied to Plato's 'ideas'. We shall
therefore use the word 'universal' instead of the word 'idea', to
describe what Plato meant. The essence of the sort of entity that Plato
meant is that it is opposed to the particular things that are given in
sensation. We speak of whatever is given in sensation, or is of the same
nature as things given in sensation, as a _particular_; by opposition
to this, a _universal_ will be anything which may be shared by many
particulars, and has those characteristics which, as we saw, distinguish
justice and whiteness from just acts and white things.

When we examine common words, we find that, broadly speaking, proper
names stand for particulars, while other substantives, adjectives,
prepositions, and verbs stand for universals. Pronouns stand for
particulars, but are ambiguous: it is only by the context or the
circumstances that we know what particulars they stand for. The word
'now' stands for a particular, namely the present moment; but like
pronouns, it stands for an ambiguous particular, because the present is
always changing.

It will be seen that no sentence can be made up without at least one
word which denotes a universal. The nearest approach would be some such
statement as 'I like this'. But even here the word 'like' denotes
a universal, for I may like other things, and other people may like
things. Thus all truths involve universals, and all knowledge of truths
involves acquaintance with universals.

Seeing that nearly all the words to be found in the dictionary stand
for universals, it is strange that hardly anybody except students of
philosophy ever realizes that there are such entities as universals. We
do not naturally dwell upon those words in a sentence which do not stand
for particulars; and if we are forced to dwell upon a word which stands
for a universal, we naturally think of it as standing for some one of
the particulars that come under the universal. When, for example, we
hear the sentence, 'Charles I's head was cut off', we may naturally
enough think of Charles I, of Charles I's head, and of the operation
of cutting off _his_ head, which are all particulars; but we do not
naturally dwell upon what is meant by the word 'head' or the word
'cut', which is a universal: We feel such words to be incomplete and
insubstantial; they seem to demand a context before anything can be
done with them. Hence we succeed in avoiding all notice of universals as
such, until the study of philosophy forces them upon our attention.

Even among philosophers, we may say, broadly, that only those universals
which are named by adjectives or substantives have been much or often
recognized, while those named by verbs and prepositions have been
usually overlooked. This omission has had a very great effect upon
philosophy; it is hardly too much to say that most metaphysics, since
Spinoza, has been largely determined by it. The way this has occurred
is, in outline, as follows: Speaking generally, adjectives and common
nouns express qualities or properties of single things, whereas
prepositions and verbs tend to express relations between two or more
things. Thus the neglect of prepositions and verbs led to the belief
that every proposition can be regarded as attributing a property to a
single thing, rather than as expressing a relation between two or more
things. Hence it was supposed that, ultimately, there can be no such
entities as relations between things. Hence either there can be only
one thing in the universe, or, if there are many things, they cannot
possibly interact in any way, since any interaction would be a relation,
and relations are impossible.

The first of these views, advocated by Spinoza and held in our own day
by Bradley and many other philosophers, is called _monism_; the second,
advocated by Leibniz but not very common nowadays, is called _monadism_,
because each of the isolated things is called a _monad_. Both these
opposing philosophies, interesting as they are, result, in my opinion,
from an undue attention to one sort of universals, namely the sort
represented by adjectives and substantives rather than by verbs and
prepositions.

As a matter of fact, if any one were anxious to deny altogether that
there are such things as universals, we should find that we cannot
strictly prove that there are such entities as _qualities_, i.e. the
universals represented by adjectives and substantives, whereas we
can prove that there must be _relations_, i.e. the sort of universals
generally represented by verbs and prepositions. Let us take in
illustration the universal _whiteness_. If we believe that there is such
a universal, we shall say that things are white because they have the
quality of whiteness. This view, however, was strenuously denied by
Berkeley and Hume, who have been followed in this by later empiricists.
The form which their denial took was to deny that there are such things
as 'abstract ideas '. When we want to think of whiteness, they said, we
form an image of some particular white thing, and reason concerning this
particular, taking care not to deduce anything concerning it which we
cannot see to be equally true of any other white thing. As an account of
our actual mental processes, this is no doubt largely true. In geometry,
for example, when we wish to prove something about all triangles, we
draw a particular triangle and reason about it, taking care not to use
any characteristic which it does not share with other triangles. The
beginner, in order to avoid error, often finds it useful to draw several
triangles, as unlike each other as possible, in order to make sure that
his reasoning is equally applicable to all of them. But a difficulty
emerges as soon as we ask ourselves how we know that a thing is white
or a triangle. If we wish to avoid the universals _whiteness_ and
_triangularity_, we shall choose some particular patch of white or some
particular triangle, and say that anything is white or a triangle if it
has the right sort of resemblance to our chosen particular. But then the
resemblance required will have to be a universal. Since there are many
white things, the resemblance must hold between many pairs of particular
white things; and this is the characteristic of a universal. It will be
useless to say that there is a different resemblance for each pair, for
then we shall have to say that these resemblances resemble each other,
and thus at last we shall be forced to admit resemblance as a universal.
The relation of resemblance, therefore, must be a true universal. And
having been forced to admit this universal, we find that it is no longer
worth while to invent difficult and unplausible theories to avoid the
admission of such universals as whiteness and triangularity.

Berkeley and Hume failed to perceive this refutation of their rejection
of 'abstract ideas', because, like their adversaries, they only thought
of _qualities_, and altogether ignored _relations_ as universals. We
have therefore here another respect in which the rationalists appear to
have been in the right as against the empiricists, although, owing to
the neglect or denial of relations, the deductions made by rationalists
were, if anything, more apt to be mistaken than those made by
empiricists.

Having now seen that there must be such entities as universals, the next
point to be proved is that their being is not merely mental. By this is
meant that whatever being belongs to them is independent of their being
thought of or in any way apprehended by minds. We have already touched
on this subject at the end of the preceding chapter, but we must now
consider more fully what sort of being it is that belongs to universals.

Consider such a proposition as 'Edinburgh is north of London'. Here we
have a relation between two places, and it seems plain that the relation
subsists independently of our knowledge of it. When we come to know that
Edinburgh is north of London, we come to know something which has to
do only with Edinburgh and London: we do not cause the truth of the
proposition by coming to know it, on the contrary we merely apprehend a
fact which was there before we knew it. The part of the earth's surface
where Edinburgh stands would be north of the part where London stands,
even if there were no human being to know about north and south, and
even if there were no minds at all in the universe. This is, of course,
denied by many philosophers, either for Berkeley's reasons or for
Kant's. But we have already considered these reasons, and decided that
they are inadequate. We may therefore now assume it to be true that
nothing mental is presupposed in the fact that Edinburgh is north of
London. But this fact involves the relation 'north of', which is a
universal; and it would be impossible for the whole fact to involve
nothing mental if the relation 'north of', which is a constituent part
of the fact, did involve anything mental. Hence we must admit that the
relation, like the terms it relates, is not dependent upon thought, but
belongs to the independent world which thought apprehends but does not
create.

This conclusion, however, is met by the difficulty that the relation
'north of' does not seem to _exist_ in the same sense in which Edinburgh
and London exist. If we ask 'Where and when does this relation exist?'
the answer must be 'Nowhere and nowhen'. There is no place or time where
we can find the relation 'north of'. It does not exist in Edinburgh any
more than in London, for it relates the two and is neutral as between
them. Nor can we say that it exists at any particular time. Now
everything that can be apprehended by the senses or by introspection
exists at some particular time. Hence the relation 'north of' is
radically different from such things. It is neither in space nor in
time, neither material nor mental; yet it is something.

It is largely the very peculiar kind of being that belongs to universals
which has led many people to suppose that they are really mental. We
can think _of_ a universal, and our thinking then exists in a perfectly
ordinary sense, like any other mental act. Suppose, for example, that
we are thinking of whiteness. Then _in one sense_ it may be said that
whiteness is 'in our mind'. We have here the same ambiguity as we noted
in discussing Berkeley in Chapter IV. In the strict sense, it is not
whiteness that is in our mind, but the act of thinking of whiteness. The
connected ambiguity in the word 'idea', which we noted at the same time,
also causes confusion here. In one sense of this word, namely the sense
in which it denotes the _object_ of an act of thought, whiteness is an
'idea'. Hence, if the ambiguity is not guarded against, we may come to
think that whiteness is an 'idea' in the other sense, i.e. an act of
thought; and thus we come to think that whiteness is mental. But in so
thinking, we rob it of its essential quality of universality. One man's
act of thought is necessarily a different thing from another man's; one
man's act of thought at one time is necessarily a different thing from
the same man's act of thought at another time. Hence, if whiteness were
the thought as opposed to its object, no two different men could think
of it, and no one man could think of it twice. That which many different
thoughts of whiteness have in common is their _object_, and this object
is different from all of them. Thus universals are not thoughts, though
when known they are the objects of thoughts.

We shall find it convenient only to speak of things _existing_ when they
are in time, that is to say, when we can point to some time at which
they exist (not excluding the possibility of their existing at all
times). Thus thoughts and feelings, minds and physical objects exist.
But universals do not exist in this sense; we shall say that they
_subsist_ or _have being_, where 'being' is opposed to 'existence'
as being timeless. The world of universals, therefore, may also be
described as the world of being. The world of being is unchangeable,
rigid, exact, delightful to the mathematician, the logician, the builder
of metaphysical systems, and all who love perfection more than life. The
world of existence is fleeting, vague, without sharp boundaries,
without any clear plan or arrangement, but it contains all thoughts and
feelings, all the data of sense, and all physical objects, everything
that can do either good or harm, everything that makes any difference to
the value of life and the world. According to our temperaments, we shall
prefer the contemplation of the one or of the other. The one we do not
prefer will probably seem to us a pale shadow of the one we prefer, and
hardly worthy to be regarded as in any sense real. But the truth is that
both have the same claim on our impartial attention, both are real,
and both are important to the metaphysician. Indeed no sooner have we
distinguished the two worlds than it becomes necessary to consider their
relations.

But first of all we must examine our knowledge of universals. This
consideration will occupy us in the following chapter, where we shall
find that it solves the problem of _a priori_ knowledge, from which we
were first led to consider universals.



CHAPTER X. ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF UNIVERSALS

In regard to one man's knowledge at a given time, universals, like
particulars, may be divided into those known by acquaintance, those
known only by description, and those not known either by acquaintance or
by description.

Let us consider first the knowledge of universals by acquaintance. It is
obvious, to begin with, that we are acquainted with such universals as
white, red, black, sweet, sour, loud, hard, etc., i.e. with qualities
which are exemplified in sense-data. When we see a white patch, we are
acquainted, in the first instance, with the particular patch; but by
seeing many white patches, we easily learn to abstract the whiteness
which they all have in common, and in learning to do this we are
learning to be acquainted with whiteness. A similar process will make us
acquainted with any other universal of the same sort. Universals of this
sort may be called 'sensible qualities'. They can be apprehended with
less effort of abstraction than any others, and they seem less removed
from particulars than other universals are.

We come next to relations. The easiest relations to apprehend are those
which hold between the different parts of a single complex sense-datum.
For example, I can see at a glance the whole of the page on which I
am writing; thus the whole page is included in one sense-datum. But I
perceive that some parts of the page are to the left of other parts,
and some parts are above other parts. The process of abstraction in this
case seems to proceed somewhat as follows: I see successively a number
of sense-data in which one part is to the left of another; I perceive,
as in the case of different white patches, that all these sense-data
have something in common, and by abstraction I find that what they have
in common is a certain relation between their parts, namely the relation
which I call 'being to the left of'. In this way I become acquainted
with the universal relation.

In like manner I become aware of the relation of before and after in
time. Suppose I hear a chime of bells: when the last bell of the chime
sounds, I can retain the whole chime before my mind, and I can perceive
that the earlier bells came before the later ones. Also in memory I
perceive that what I am remembering came before the present time. From
either of these sources I can abstract the universal relation of before
and after, just as I abstracted the universal relation 'being to the
left of'. Thus time-relations, like space-relations, are among those
with which we are acquainted.

Another relation with which we become acquainted in much the same way is
resemblance. If I see simultaneously two shades of green, I can see
that they resemble each other; if I also see a shade of red: at the same
time, I can see that the two greens have more resemblance to each other
than either has to the red. In this way I become acquainted with the
universal _resemblance_ or _similarity_.

Between universals, as between particulars, there are relations of which
we may be immediately aware. We have just seen that we can perceive
that the resemblance between two shades of green is greater than the
resemblance between a shade of red and a shade of green. Here we are
dealing with a relation, namely 'greater than', between two relations.
Our knowledge of such relations, though it requires more power of
abstraction than is required for perceiving the qualities of sense-data,
appears to be equally immediate, and (at least in some cases) equally
indubitable. Thus there is immediate knowledge concerning universals as
well as concerning sense-data.

Returning now to the problem of _a priori_ knowledge, which we left
unsolved when we began the consideration of universals, we find
ourselves in a position to deal with it in a much more satisfactory
manner than was possible before. Let us revert to the proposition 'two
and two are four'. It is fairly obvious, in view of what has been said,
that this proposition states a relation between the universal 'two' and
the universal 'four'. This suggests a proposition which we shall
now endeavour to establish: namely, _All _a priori_ knowledge deals
exclusively with the relations of universals_. This proposition is
of great importance, and goes a long way towards solving our previous
difficulties concerning _a priori_ knowledge.

The only case in which it might seem, at first sight, as if our
proposition were untrue, is the case in which an _a priori_ proposition
states that _all_ of one class of particulars belong to some other
class, or (what comes to the same thing) that _all_ particulars having
some one property also have some other. In this case it might seem
as though we were dealing with the particulars that have the property
rather than with the property. The proposition 'two and two are four' is
really a case in point, for this may be stated in the form 'any two
and any other two are four', or 'any collection formed of two twos is a
collection of four'. If we can show that such statements as this really
deal only with universals, our proposition may be regarded as proved.

One way of discovering what a proposition deals with is to ask ourselves
what words we must understand--in other words, what objects we must be
acquainted with--in order to see what the proposition means. As soon as
we see what the proposition means, even if we do not yet know whether
it is true or false, it is evident that we must have acquaintance with
whatever is really dealt with by the proposition. By applying this test,
it appears that many propositions which might seem to be concerned with
particulars are really concerned only with universals. In the special
case of 'two and two are four', even when we interpret it as meaning
'any collection formed of two twos is a collection of four', it is plain
that we can understand the proposition, i.e. we can see what it is that
it asserts, as soon as we know what is meant by 'collection' and 'two'
and 'four'. It is quite unnecessary to know all the couples in the
world: if it were necessary, obviously we could never understand the
proposition, since the couples are infinitely numerous and therefore
cannot all be known to us. Thus although our general statement _implies_
statements about particular couples, _as soon as we know that there are
such particular couples_, yet it does not itself assert or imply that
there are such particular couples, and thus fails to make any statement
whatever about any actual particular couple. The statement made is about
'couple', the universal, and not about this or that couple.

Thus the statement 'two and two are four' deals exclusively with
universals, and therefore may be known by anybody who is acquainted
with the universals concerned and can perceive the relation between them
which the statement asserts. It must be taken as a fact, discovered
by reflecting upon our knowledge, that we have the power of sometimes
perceiving such relations between universals, and therefore of sometimes
knowing general _a priori_ propositions such as those of arithmetic and
logic. The thing that seemed mysterious, when we formerly considered
such knowledge, was that it seemed to anticipate and control experience.
This, however, we can now see to have been an error. _No_ fact
concerning anything capable of being experienced can be known
independently of experience. We know _a priori_ that two things and two
other things together make four things, but we do _not_ know _a priori_
that if Brown and Jones are two, and Robinson and Smith are two, then
Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are four. The reason is that this
proposition cannot be understood at all unless we know that there are
such people as Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith, and this we can
only know by experience. Hence, although our general proposition is _a
priori_, all its applications to actual particulars involve experience
and therefore contain an empirical element. In this way what seemed
mysterious in our _a priori_ knowledge is seen to have been based upon
an error.

It will serve to make the point clearer if we contrast our genuine _a
priori_ judgement with an empirical generalization, such as 'all men are
mortals'. Here as before, we can _understand_ what the proposition
means as soon as we understand the universals involved, namely _man_ and
_mortal_. It is obviously unnecessary to have an individual acquaintance
with the whole human race in order to understand what our proposition
means. Thus the difference between an _a priori_ general proposition
and an empirical generalization does not come in the _meaning_ of the
proposition; it comes in the nature of the _evidence_ for it. In the
empirical case, the evidence consists in the particular instances.
We believe that all men are mortal because we know that there are
innumerable instances of men dying, and no instances of their living
beyond a certain age. We do not believe it because we see a connexion
between the universal _man_ and the universal _mortal_. It is true that
if physiology can prove, assuming the general laws that govern living
bodies, that no living organism can last for ever, that gives a
connexion between _man_ and _mortality_ which would enable us to assert
our proposition without appealing to the special evidence of _men_
dying. But that only means that our generalization has been subsumed
under a wider generalization, for which the evidence is still of the
same kind, though more extensive. The progress of science is constantly
producing such subsumptions, and therefore giving a constantly wider
inductive basis for scientific generalizations. But although this gives
a greater _degree_ of certainty, it does not give a different _kind_:
the ultimate ground remains inductive, i.e. derived from instances, and
not an _a priori_ connexion of universals such as we have in logic and
arithmetic.

Two opposite points are to be observed concerning _a priori_ general
propositions. The first is that, if many particular instances are known,
our general proposition may be arrived at in the first instance by
induction, and the connexion of universals may be only subsequently
perceived. For example, it is known that if we draw perpendiculars
to the sides of a triangle from the opposite angles, all three
perpendiculars meet in a point. It would be quite possible to be first
led to this proposition by actually drawing perpendiculars in many
cases, and finding that they always met in a point; this experience
might lead us to look for the general proof and find it. Such cases are
common in the experience of every mathematician.

The other point is more interesting, and of more philosophical
importance. It is, that we may sometimes know a general proposition in
cases where we do not know a single instance of it. Take such a case as
the following: We know that any two numbers can be multiplied together,
and will give a third called their _product_. We know that all pairs
of integers the product of which is less than 100 have been actually
multiplied together, and the value of the product recorded in the
multiplication table. But we also know that the number of integers is
infinite, and that only a finite number of pairs of integers ever have
been or ever will be thought of by human beings. Hence it follows that
there are pairs of integers which never have been and never will be
thought of by human beings, and that all of them deal with integers the
product of which is over 100. Hence we arrive at the proposition:
'All products of two integers, which never have been and never will
be thought of by any human being, are over 100.' Here is a general
proposition of which the truth is undeniable, and yet, from the very
nature of the case, we can never give an instance; because any two
numbers we may think of are excluded by the terms of the proposition.

This possibility, of knowledge of general propositions of which no
instance can be given, is often denied, because it is not perceived
that the knowledge of such propositions only requires a knowledge of the
relations of universals, and does not require any knowledge of instances
of the universals in question. Yet the knowledge of such general
propositions is quite vital to a great deal of what is generally
admitted to be known. For example, we saw, in our early chapters,
that knowledge of physical objects, as opposed to sense-data, is only
obtained by an inference, and that they are not things with which we are
acquainted. Hence we can never know any proposition of the form 'this
is a physical object', where 'this' is something immediately known. It
follows that all our knowledge concerning physical objects is such that
no actual instance can be given. We can give instances of the associated
sense-data, but we cannot give instances of the actual physical objects.
Hence our knowledge as to physical objects depends throughout upon this
possibility of general knowledge where no instance can be given. And the
same applies to our knowledge of other people's minds, or of any other
class of things of which no instance is known to us by acquaintance.

We may now take a survey of the sources of our knowledge, as they have
appeared in the course of our analysis. We have first to distinguish
knowledge of things and knowledge of truths. In each there are two
kinds, one immediate and one derivative. Our immediate knowledge of
things, which we called _acquaintance_, consists of two sorts, according
as the things known are particulars or universals. Among particulars, we
have acquaintance with sense-data and (probably) with ourselves. Among
universals, there seems to be no principle by which we can decide which
can be known by acquaintance, but it is clear that among those that
can be so known are sensible qualities, relations of space and time,
similarity, and certain abstract logical universals. Our derivative
knowledge of things, which we call knowledge by _description_, always
involves both acquaintance with something and knowledge of truths. Our
immediate knowledge of _truths_ may be called _intuitive_ knowledge,
and the truths so known may be called _self-evident_ truths. Among such
truths are included those which merely state what is given in sense, and
also certain abstract logical and arithmetical principles, and (though
with less certainty) some ethical propositions. Our _derivative_
knowledge of truths consists of everything that we can deduce from
self-evident truths by the use of self-evident principles of deduction.

If the above account is correct, all our knowledge of truths depends
upon our intuitive knowledge. It therefore becomes important to consider
the nature and scope of intuitive knowledge, in much the same way as,
at an earlier stage, we considered the nature and scope of knowledge by
acquaintance. But knowledge of truths raises a further problem, which
does not arise in regard to knowledge of things, namely the problem of
_error_. Some of our beliefs turn out to be erroneous, and therefore
it becomes necessary to consider how, if at all, we can distinguish
knowledge from error. This problem does not arise with regard
to knowledge by acquaintance, for, whatever may be the object of
acquaintance, even in dreams and hallucinations, there is no error
involved so long as we do not go beyond the immediate object: error can
only arise when we regard the immediate object, i.e. the sense-datum,
as the mark of some physical object. Thus the problems connected
with knowledge of truths are more difficult than those connected
with knowledge of things. As the first of the problems connected
with knowledge of truths, let us examine the nature and scope of our
intuitive judgements.



CHAPTER XI. ON INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE

There is a common impression that everything that we believe ought to be
capable of proof, or at least of being shown to be highly probable. It
is felt by many that a belief for which no reason can be given is an
unreasonable belief. In the main, this view is just. Almost all our
common beliefs are either inferred, or capable of being inferred, from
other beliefs which may be regarded as giving the reason for them. As a
rule, the reason has been forgotten, or has even never been consciously
present to our minds. Few of us ever ask ourselves, for example, what
reason there is to suppose the food we are just going to eat will not
turn out to be poison. Yet we feel, when challenged, that a perfectly
good reason could be found, even if we are not ready with it at the
moment. And in this belief we are usually justified.

But let us imagine some insistent Socrates, who, whatever reason we
give him, continues to demand a reason for the reason. We must sooner
or later, and probably before very long, be driven to a point where we
cannot find any further reason, and where it becomes almost certain that
no further reason is even theoretically discoverable. Starting with the
common beliefs of daily life, we can be driven back from point to point,
until we come to some general principle, or some instance of a general
principle, which seems luminously evident, and is not itself capable
of being deduced from anything more evident. In most questions of
daily life, such as whether our food is likely to be nourishing and not
poisonous, we shall be driven back to the inductive principle, which we
discussed in Chapter VI. But beyond that, there seems to be no further
regress. The principle itself is constantly used in our reasoning,
sometimes consciously, sometimes unconsciously; but there is no
reasoning which, starting from some simpler self-evident principle,
leads us to the principle of induction as its conclusion. And the same
holds for other logical principles. Their truth is evident to us, and we
employ them in constructing demonstrations; but they themselves, or at
least some of them, are incapable of demonstration.

Self-evidence, however, is not confined to those among general
principles which are incapable of proof. When a certain number of
logical principles have been admitted, the rest can be deduced from
them; but the propositions deduced are often just as self-evident as
those that were assumed without proof. All arithmetic, moreover, can
be deduced from the general principles of logic, yet the simple
propositions of arithmetic, such as 'two and two are four', are just as
self-evident as the principles of logic.

It would seem, also, though this is more disputable, that there are some
self-evident ethical principles, such as 'we ought to pursue what is
good'.

It should be observed that, in all cases of general principles,
particular instances, dealing with familiar things, are more evident
than the general principle. For example, the law of contradiction states
that nothing can both have a certain property and not have it. This is
evident as soon as it is understood, but it is not so evident as that a
particular rose which we see cannot be both red and not red. (It is of
course possible that parts of the rose may be red and parts not red, or
that the rose may be of a shade of pink which we hardly know whether to
call red or not; but in the former case it is plain that the rose as a
whole is not red, while in the latter case the answer is theoretically
definite as soon as we have decided on a precise definition of 'red'.)
It is usually through particular instances that we come to be able to
see the general principle. Only those who are practised in dealing with
abstractions can readily grasp a general principle without the help of
instances.

In addition to general principles, the other kind of self-evident truths
are those immediately derived from sensation. We will call such truths
'truths of perception', and the judgements expressing them we will
call 'judgements of perception'. But here a certain amount of care
is required in getting at the precise nature of the truths that are
self-evident. The actual sense-data are neither true nor false. A
particular patch of colour which I see, for example, simply exists: it
is not the sort of thing that is true or false. It is true that there is
such a patch, true that it has a certain shape and degree of brightness,
true that it is surrounded by certain other colours. But the patch
itself, like everything else in the world of sense, is of a radically
different kind from the things that are true or false, and therefore
cannot properly be said to be _true_. Thus whatever self-evident truths
may be obtained from our senses must be different from the sense-data
from which they are obtained.

It would seem that there are two kinds of self-evident truths of
perception, though perhaps in the last analysis the two kinds may
coalesce. First, there is the kind which simply asserts the _existence_
of the sense-datum, without in any way analysing it. We see a patch
of red, and we judge 'there is such-and-such a patch of red', or more
strictly 'there is that'; this is one kind of intuitive judgement of
perception. The other kind arises when the object of sense is complex,
and we subject it to some degree of analysis. If, for instance, we see a
_round_ patch of red, we may judge 'that patch of red is round'. This is
again a judgement of perception, but it differs from our previous kind.
In our present kind we have a single sense-datum which has both colour
and shape: the colour is red and the shape is round. Our judgement
analyses the datum into colour and shape, and then recombines them by
stating that the red colour is round in shape. Another example of this
kind of judgement is 'this is to the right of that', where 'this'
and 'that' are seen simultaneously. In this kind of judgement the
sense-datum contains constituents which have some relation to each
other, and the judgement asserts that these constituents have this
relation.

Another class of intuitive judgements, analogous to those of sense and
yet quite distinct from them, are judgements of _memory_. There is some
danger of confusion as to the nature of memory, owing to the fact that
memory of an object is apt to be accompanied by an image of the object,
and yet the image cannot be what constitutes memory. This is easily seen
by merely noticing that the image is in the present, whereas what is
remembered is known to be in the past. Moreover, we are certainly able
to some extent to compare our image with the object remembered, so
that we often know, within somewhat wide limits, how far our image is
accurate; but this would be impossible, unless the object, as opposed to
the image, were in some way before the mind. Thus the essence of memory
is not constituted by the image, but by having immediately before the
mind an object which is recognized as past. But for the fact of memory
in this sense, we should not know that there ever was a past at all,
nor should we be able to understand the word 'past', any more than a man
born blind can understand the word 'light'. Thus there must be intuitive
judgements of memory, and it is upon them, ultimately, that all our
knowledge of the past depends.

The case of memory, however, raises a difficulty, for it is notoriously
fallacious, and thus throws doubt on the trustworthiness of intuitive
judgements in general. This difficulty is no light one. But let us
first narrow its scope as far as possible. Broadly speaking, memory is
trustworthy in proportion to the vividness of the experience and to its
nearness in time. If the house next door was struck by lightning half a
minute ago, my memory of what I saw and heard will be so reliable that
it would be preposterous to doubt whether there had been a flash at
all. And the same applies to less vivid experiences, so long as they are
recent. I am absolutely certain that half a minute ago I was sitting in
the same chair in which I am sitting now. Going backward over the day,
I find things of which I am quite certain, other things of which I am
almost certain, other things of which I can become certain by thought
and by calling up attendant circumstances, and some things of which I
am by no means certain. I am quite certain that I ate my breakfast this
morning, but if I were as indifferent to my breakfast as a philosopher
should be, I should be doubtful. As to the conversation at breakfast,
I can recall some of it easily, some with an effort, some only with a
large element of doubt, and some not at all. Thus there is a continual
gradation in the degree of self-evidence of what I remember, and a
corresponding gradation in the trustworthiness of my memory.

Thus the first answer to the difficulty of fallacious memory is to say
that memory has degrees of self-evidence, and that these correspond
to the degrees of its trustworthiness, reaching a limit of perfect
self-evidence and perfect trustworthiness in our memory of events which
are recent and vivid.

It would seem, however, that there are cases of very firm belief in a
memory which is wholly false. It is probable that, in these cases, what
is really remembered, in the sense of being immediately before the mind,
is something other than what is falsely believed in, though something
generally associated with it. George IV is said to have at last believed
that he was at the battle of Waterloo, because he had so often said that
he was. In this case, what was immediately remembered was his repeated
assertion; the belief in what he was asserting (if it existed) would
be produced by association with the remembered assertion, and would
therefore not be a genuine case of memory. It would seem that cases of
fallacious memory can probably all be dealt with in this way, i.e. they
can be shown to be not cases of memory in the strict sense at all.

One important point about self-evidence is made clear by the case of
memory, and that is, that self-evidence has degrees: it is not a quality
which is simply present or absent, but a quality which may be more or
less present, in gradations ranging from absolute certainty down to an
almost imperceptible faintness. Truths of perception and some of the
principles of logic have the very highest degree of self-evidence;
truths of immediate memory have an almost equally high degree. The
inductive principle has less self-evidence than some of the other
principles of logic, such as 'what follows from a true premiss must be
true'. Memories have a diminishing self-evidence as they become remoter
and fainter; the truths of logic and mathematics have (broadly speaking)
less self-evidence as they become more complicated. Judgements of
intrinsic ethical or aesthetic value are apt to have some self-evidence,
but not much.

Degrees of self-evidence are important in the theory of knowledge,
since, if propositions may (as seems likely) have some degree of
self-evidence without being true, it will not be necessary to abandon
all connexion between self-evidence and truth, but merely to say that,
where there is a conflict, the more self-evident proposition is to be
retained and the less self-evident rejected.

It seems, however, highly probable that two different notions are
combined in 'self-evidence' as above explained; that one of them,
which corresponds to the highest degree of self-evidence, is really an
infallible guarantee of truth, while the other, which corresponds to
all the other degrees, does not give an infallible guarantee, but only a
greater or less presumption. This, however, is only a suggestion, which
we cannot as yet develop further. After we have dealt with the nature
of truth, we shall return to the subject of self-evidence, in connexion
with the distinction between knowledge and error.



CHAPTER XII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

Our knowledge of truths, unlike our knowledge of things, has an
opposite, namely _error_. So far as things are concerned, we may know
them or not know them, but there is no positive state of mind which can
be described as erroneous knowledge of things, so long, at any rate,
as we confine ourselves to knowledge by acquaintance. Whatever we are
acquainted with must be something; we may draw wrong inferences from
our acquaintance, but the acquaintance itself cannot be deceptive. Thus
there is no dualism as regards acquaintance. But as regards knowledge of
truths, there is a dualism. We may believe what is false as well as
what is true. We know that on very many subjects different people
hold different and incompatible opinions: hence some beliefs must be
erroneous. Since erroneous beliefs are often held just as strongly
as true beliefs, it becomes a difficult question how they are to be
distinguished from true beliefs. How are we to know, in a given case,
that our belief is not erroneous? This is a question of the very
greatest difficulty, to which no completely satisfactory answer is
possible. There is, however, a preliminary question which is rather less
difficult, and that is: What do we _mean_ by truth and falsehood? It is
this preliminary question which is to be considered in this chapter. In
this chapter we are not asking how we can know whether a belief is true
or false: we are asking what is meant by the question whether a belief
is true or false. It is to be hoped that a clear answer to this question
may help us to obtain an answer to the question what beliefs are
true, but for the present we ask only 'What is truth?' and 'What is
falsehood?' not 'What beliefs are true?' and 'What beliefs are false?'
It is very important to keep these different questions entirely
separate, since any confusion between them is sure to produce an answer
which is not really applicable to either.

There are three points to observe in the attempt to discover the nature
of truth, three requisites which any theory must fulfil.

(1) Our theory of truth must be such as to admit of its opposite,
falsehood. A good many philosophers have failed adequately to satisfy
this condition: they have constructed theories according to which all
our thinking ought to have been true, and have then had the greatest
difficulty in finding a place for falsehood. In this respect our theory
of belief must differ from our theory of acquaintance, since in the case
of acquaintance it was not necessary to take account of any opposite.

(2) It seems fairly evident that if there were no beliefs there could
be no falsehood, and no truth either, in the sense in which truth is
correlative to falsehood. If we imagine a world of mere matter, there
would be no room for falsehood in such a world, and although it would
contain what may be called 'facts', it would not contain any truths, in
the sense in which truths are things of the same kind as falsehoods.
In fact, truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs and statements:
hence a world of mere matter, since it would contain no beliefs or
statements, would also contain no truth or falsehood.

(3) But, as against what we have just said, it is to be observed that
the truth or falsehood of a belief always depends upon something which
lies outside the belief itself. If I believe that Charles I died on the
scaffold, I believe truly, not because of any intrinsic quality of my
belief, which could be discovered by merely examining the belief, but
because of an historical event which happened two and a half centuries
ago. If I believe that Charles I died in his bed, I believe falsely: no
degree of vividness in my belief, or of care in arriving at it, prevents
it from being false, again because of what happened long ago, and not
because of any intrinsic property of my belief. Hence, although truth
and falsehood are properties of beliefs, they are properties dependent
upon the relations of the beliefs to other things, not upon any internal
quality of the beliefs.

The third of the above requisites leads us to adopt the view--which has
on the whole been commonest among philosophers--that truth consists in
some form of correspondence between belief and fact. It is, however, by
no means an easy matter to discover a form of correspondence to which
there are no irrefutable objections. By this partly--and partly by the
feeling that, if truth consists in a correspondence of thought with
something outside thought, thought can never know when truth has been
attained--many philosophers have been led to try to find some definition
of truth which shall not consist in relation to something wholly outside
belief. The most important attempt at a definition of this sort is the
theory that truth consists in _coherence_. It is said that the mark of
falsehood is failure to cohere in the body of our beliefs, and that it
is the essence of a truth to form part of the completely rounded system
which is The Truth.

There is, however, a great difficulty in this view, or rather two great
difficulties. The first is that there is no reason to suppose that
only _one_ coherent body of beliefs is possible. It may be that, with
sufficient imagination, a novelist might invent a past for the world
that would perfectly fit on to what we know, and yet be quite different
from the real past. In more scientific matters, it is certain that there
are often two or more hypotheses which account for all the known facts
on some subject, and although, in such cases, men of science endeavour
to find facts which will rule out all the hypotheses except one, there
is no reason why they should always succeed.

In philosophy, again, it seems not uncommon for two rival hypotheses
to be both able to account for all the facts. Thus, for example, it is
possible that life is one long dream, and that the outer world has only
that degree of reality that the objects of dreams have; but although
such a view does not seem inconsistent with known facts, there is no
reason to prefer it to the common-sense view, according to which other
people and things do really exist. Thus coherence as the definition
of truth fails because there is no proof that there can be only one
coherent system.

The other objection to this definition of truth is that it assumes the
meaning of 'coherence' known, whereas, in fact, 'coherence' presupposes
the truth of the laws of logic. Two propositions are coherent when both
may be true, and are incoherent when one at least must be false. Now in
order to know whether two propositions can both be true, we must
know such truths as the law of contradiction. For example, the two
propositions, 'this tree is a beech' and 'this tree is not a beech',
are not coherent, because of the law of contradiction. But if the law of
contradiction itself were subjected to the test of coherence, we should
find that, if we choose to suppose it false, nothing will any longer
be incoherent with anything else. Thus the laws of logic supply the
skeleton or framework within which the test of coherence applies, and
they themselves cannot be established by this test.

For the above two reasons, coherence cannot be accepted as giving the
_meaning_ of truth, though it is often a most important _test_ of truth
after a certain amount of truth has become known.

Hence we are driven back to _correspondence with fact_ as constituting
the nature of truth. It remains to define precisely what we mean by
'fact', and what is the nature of the correspondence which must subsist
between belief and fact, in order that belief may be true.

In accordance with our three requisites, we have to seek a theory of
truth which (1) allows truth to have an opposite, namely falsehood, (2)
makes truth a property of beliefs, but (3) makes it a property wholly
dependent upon the relation of the beliefs to outside things.

The necessity of allowing for falsehood makes it impossible to regard
belief as a relation of the mind to a single object, which could be said
to be what is believed. If belief were so regarded, we should find that,
like acquaintance, it would not admit of the opposition of truth and
falsehood, but would have to be always true. This may be made clear
by examples. Othello believes falsely that Desdemona loves Cassio. We
cannot say that this belief consists in a relation to a single object,
'Desdemona's love for Cassio', for if there were such an object, the
belief would be true. There is in fact no such object, and therefore
Othello cannot have any relation to such an object. Hence his belief
cannot possibly consist in a relation to this object.

It might be said that his belief is a relation to a different object,
namely 'that Desdemona loves Cassio'; but it is almost as difficult to
suppose that there is such an object as this, when Desdemona does not
love Cassio, as it was to suppose that there is 'Desdemona's love for
Cassio'. Hence it will be better to seek for a theory of belief which
does not make it consist in a relation of the mind to a single object.

It is common to think of relations as though they always held between
two terms, but in fact this is not always the case. Some relations
demand three terms, some four, and so on. Take, for instance, the
relation 'between'. So long as only two terms come in, the relation
'between' is impossible: three terms are the smallest number that render
it possible. York is between London and Edinburgh; but if London and
Edinburgh were the only places in the world, there could be nothing
which was between one place and another. Similarly _jealousy_ requires
three people: there can be no such relation that does not involve three
at least. Such a proposition as 'A wishes B to promote C's marriage with
D' involves a relation of four terms; that is to say, A and B and C and
D all come in, and the relation involved cannot be expressed otherwise
than in a form involving all four. Instances might be multiplied
indefinitely, but enough has been said to show that there are relations
which require more than two terms before they can occur.

The relation involved in _judging_ or _believing_ must, if falsehood is
to be duly allowed for, be taken to be a relation between several terms,
not between two. When Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio, he
must not have before his mind a single object, 'Desdemona's love for
Cassio', or 'that Desdemona loves Cassio ', for that would require that
there should be objective falsehoods, which subsist independently of
any minds; and this, though not logically refutable, is a theory to be
avoided if possible. Thus it is easier to account for falsehood if
we take judgement to be a relation in which the mind and the various
objects concerned all occur severally; that is to say, Desdemona and
loving and Cassio must all be terms in the relation which subsists when
Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio. This relation, therefore,
is a relation of four terms, since Othello also is one of the terms of
the relation. When we say that it is a relation of four terms, we do not
mean that Othello has a certain relation to Desdemona, and has the same
relation to loving and also to Cassio. This may be true of some other
relation than believing; but believing, plainly, is not a relation which
Othello has to _each_ of the three terms concerned, but to _all_ of
them together: there is only one example of the relation of believing
involved, but this one example knits together four terms. Thus the
actual occurrence, at the moment when Othello is entertaining his
belief, is that the relation called 'believing' is knitting together
into one complex whole the four terms Othello, Desdemona, loving, and
Cassio. What is called belief or judgement is nothing but this relation
of believing or judging, which relates a mind to several things other
than itself. An _act_ of belief or of judgement is the occurrence
between certain terms at some particular time, of the relation of
believing or judging.

We are now in a position to understand what it is that distinguishes a
true judgement from a false one. For this purpose we will adopt certain
definitions. In every act of judgement there is a mind which judges, and
there are terms concerning which it judges. We will call the mind the
_subject_ in the judgement, and the remaining terms the _objects_. Thus,
when Othello judges that Desdemona loves Cassio, Othello is the subject,
while the objects are Desdemona and loving and Cassio. The subject and
the objects together are called the _constituents_ of the judgement.
It will be observed that the relation of judging has what is called a
'sense' or 'direction'. We may say, metaphorically, that it puts its
objects in a certain _order_, which we may indicate by means of the
order of the words in the sentence. (In an inflected language, the same
thing will be indicated by inflections, e.g. by the difference between
nominative and accusative.) Othello's judgement that Cassio loves
Desdemona differs from his judgement that Desdemona loves Cassio, in
spite of the fact that it consists of the same constituents, because the
relation of judging places the constituents in a different order in the
two cases. Similarly, if Cassio judges that Desdemona loves Othello,
the constituents of the judgement are still the same, but their order is
different. This property of having a 'sense' or 'direction' is one which
the relation of judging shares with all other relations. The 'sense'
of relations is the ultimate source of order and series and a host of
mathematical concepts; but we need not concern ourselves further with
this aspect.

We spoke of the relation called 'judging' or 'believing' as knitting
together into one complex whole the subject and the objects. In this
respect, judging is exactly like every other relation. Whenever a
relation holds between two or more terms, it unites the terms into a
complex whole. If Othello loves Desdemona, there is such a complex whole
as 'Othello's love for Desdemona'. The terms united by the relation may
be themselves complex, or may be simple, but the whole which results
from their being united must be complex. Wherever there is a relation
which relates certain terms, there is a complex object formed of the
union of those terms; and conversely, wherever there is a complex
object, there is a relation which relates its constituents. When an act
of believing occurs, there is a complex, in which 'believing' is the
uniting relation, and subject and objects are arranged in a certain
order by the 'sense' of the relation of believing. Among the objects,
as we saw in considering 'Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio',
one must be a relation--in this instance, the relation 'loving'. But
this relation, as it occurs in the act of believing, is not the relation
which creates the unity of the complex whole consisting of the subject
and the objects. The relation 'loving', as it occurs in the act of
believing, is one of the objects--it is a brick in the structure, not
the cement. The cement is the relation 'believing'. When the belief is
_true_, there is another complex unity, in which the relation which was
one of the objects of the belief relates the other objects. Thus, e.g.,
if Othello believes _truly_ that Desdemona loves Cassio, then there is
a complex unity, 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', which is composed
exclusively of the _objects_ of the belief, in the same order as they
had in the belief, with the relation which was one of the objects
occurring now as the cement that binds together the other objects of the
belief. On the other hand, when a belief is _false_, there is no such
complex unity composed only of the objects of the belief. If Othello
believes _falsely_ that Desdemona loves Cassio, then there is no such
complex unity as 'Desdemona's love for Cassio'.

Thus a belief is _true_ when it _corresponds_ to a certain associated
complex, and _false_ when it does not. Assuming, for the sake of
definiteness, that the objects of the belief are two terms and a
relation, the terms being put in a certain order by the 'sense' of
the believing, then if the two terms in that order are united by the
relation into a complex, the belief is true; if not, it is false. This
constitutes the definition of truth and falsehood that we were in search
of. Judging or believing is a certain complex unity of which a mind is
a constituent; if the remaining constituents, taken in the order which
they have in the belief, form a complex unity, then the belief is true;
if not, it is false.

Thus although truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs, yet they
are in a sense extrinsic properties, for the condition of the truth of
a belief is something not involving beliefs, or (in general) any mind
at all, but only the _objects_ of the belief. A mind, which believes,
believes truly when there is a _corresponding_ complex not involving the
mind, but only its objects. This correspondence ensures truth, and its
absence entails falsehood. Hence we account simultaneously for the two
facts that beliefs (a) depend on minds for their _existence_, (b) do not
depend on minds for their _truth_.

We may restate our theory as follows: If we take such a belief as
'Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio', we will call Desdemona
and Cassio the _object-terms_, and loving the _object-relation_. If
there is a complex unity 'Desdemona's love for Cassio', consisting of
the object-terms related by the object-relation in the same order as
they have in the belief, then this complex unity is called the _fact
corresponding to the belief_. Thus a belief is true when there is a
corresponding fact, and is false when there is no corresponding fact.

It will be seen that minds do not _create_ truth or falsehood. They
create beliefs, but when once the beliefs are created, the mind cannot
make them true or false, except in the special case where they concern
future things which are within the power of the person believing, such
as catching trains. What makes a belief true is a _fact_, and this fact
does not (except in exceptional cases) in any way involve the mind of
the person who has the belief.

Having now decided what we _mean_ by truth and falsehood, we have next
to consider what ways there are of knowing whether this or that belief
is true or false. This consideration will occupy the next chapter.



CHAPTER XIII. KNOWLEDGE, ERROR, AND PROBABLE OPINION

The question as to what we mean by truth and falsehood, which we
considered in the preceding chapter, is of much less interest than the
question as to how we can know what is true and what is false. This
question will occupy us in the present chapter. There can be no doubt
that _some_ of our beliefs are erroneous; thus we are led to inquire
what certainty we can ever have that such and such a belief is not
erroneous. In other words, can we ever _know_ anything at all, or do we
merely sometimes by good luck believe what is true? Before we can attack
this question, we must, however, first decide what we mean by 'knowing',
and this question is not so easy as might be supposed.

At first sight we might imagine that knowledge could be defined as 'true
belief'. When what we believe is true, it might be supposed that we had
achieved a knowledge of what we believe. But this would not accord
with the way in which the word is commonly used. To take a very trivial
instance: If a man believes that the late Prime Minister's last name
began with a B, he believes what is true, since the late Prime Minister
was Sir Henry Campbell Bannerman. But if he believes that Mr. Balfour
was the late Prime Minister, he will still believe that the late Prime
Minister's last name began with a B, yet this belief, though true,
would not be thought to constitute knowledge. If a newspaper, by an
intelligent anticipation, announces the result of a battle before any
telegram giving the result has been received, it may by good fortune
announce what afterwards turns out to be the right result, and it may
produce belief in some of its less experienced readers. But in spite of
the truth of their belief, they cannot be said to have knowledge. Thus
it is clear that a true belief is not knowledge when it is deduced from
a false belief.

In like manner, a true belief cannot be called knowledge when it is
deduced by a fallacious process of reasoning, even if the premisses from
which it is deduced are true. If I know that all Greeks are men and that
Socrates was a man, and I infer that Socrates was a Greek, I cannot be
said to _know_ that Socrates was a Greek, because, although my premisses
and my conclusion are true, the conclusion does not follow from the
premisses.

But are we to say that nothing is knowledge except what is validly
deduced from true premisses? Obviously we cannot say this. Such a
definition is at once too wide and too narrow. In the first place, it is
too wide, because it is not enough that our premisses should be _true_,
they must also be _known_. The man who believes that Mr. Balfour was the
late Prime Minister may proceed to draw valid deductions from the true
premiss that the late Prime Minister's name began with a B, but he
cannot be said to _know_ the conclusions reached by these deductions.
Thus we shall have to amend our definition by saying that knowledge
is what is validly deduced from _known_ premisses. This, however, is a
circular definition: it assumes that we already know what is meant
by 'known premisses'. It can, therefore, at best define one sort
of knowledge, the sort we call derivative, as opposed to intuitive
knowledge. We may say: '_Derivative_ knowledge is what is validly
deduced from premisses known intuitively'. In this statement there is
no formal defect, but it leaves the definition of _intuitive_ knowledge
still to seek.

Leaving on one side, for the moment, the question of intuitive
knowledge, let us consider the above suggested definition of derivative
knowledge. The chief objection to it is that it unduly limits knowledge.
It constantly happens that people entertain a true belief, which has
grown up in them because of some piece of intuitive knowledge from which
it is capable of being validly inferred, but from which it has not, as a
matter of fact, been inferred by any logical process.

Take, for example, the beliefs produced by reading. If the newspapers
announce the death of the King, we are fairly well justified in
believing that the King is dead, since this is the sort of announcement
which would not be made if it were false. And we are quite amply
justified in believing that the newspaper asserts that the King is
dead. But here the intuitive knowledge upon which our belief is based
is knowledge of the existence of sense-data derived from looking at
the print which gives the news. This knowledge scarcely rises into
consciousness, except in a person who cannot read easily. A child may be
aware of the shapes of the letters, and pass gradually and painfully to
a realization of their meaning. But anybody accustomed to reading
passes at once to what the letters mean, and is not aware, except on
reflection, that he has derived this knowledge from the sense-data
called seeing the printed letters. Thus although a valid inference from
the-letters to their meaning is possible, and _could_ be performed
by the reader, it is not in fact performed, since he does not in fact
perform any operation which can be called logical inference. Yet
it would be absurd to say that the reader does not _know_ that the
newspaper announces the King's death.

We must, therefore, admit as derivative knowledge whatever is the result
of intuitive knowledge even if by mere association, provided there _is_
a valid logical connexion, and the person in question could become aware
of this connexion by reflection. There are in fact many ways, besides
logical inference, by which we pass from one belief to another: the
passage from the print to its meaning illustrates these ways. These
ways may be called 'psychological inference'. We shall, then, admit such
psychological inference as a means of obtaining derivative knowledge,
provided there is a discoverable logical inference which runs parallel
to the psychological inference. This renders our definition of
derivative knowledge less precise than we could wish, since the word
'discoverable' is vague: it does not tell us how much reflection may be
needed in order to make the discovery. But in fact 'knowledge' is not a
precise conception: it merges into 'probable opinion', as we shall
see more fully in the course of the present chapter. A very precise
definition, therefore, should not be sought, since any such definition
must be more or less misleading.

The chief difficulty in regard to knowledge, however, does not arise
over derivative knowledge, but over intuitive knowledge. So long as we
are dealing with derivative knowledge, we have the test of intuitive
knowledge to fall back upon. But in regard to intuitive beliefs, it is
by no means easy to discover any criterion by which to distinguish
some as true and others as erroneous. In this question it is scarcely
possible to reach any very precise result: all our knowledge of truths
is infected with some degree of doubt, and a theory which ignored this
fact would be plainly wrong. Something may be done, however, to mitigate
the difficulties of the question.

Our theory of truth, to begin with, supplies the possibility of
distinguishing certain truths as _self-evident_ in a sense which ensures
infallibility. When a belief is true, we said, there is a corresponding
fact, in which the several objects of the belief form a single complex.
The belief is said to constitute _knowledge_ of this fact, provided
it fulfils those further somewhat vague conditions which we have been
considering in the present chapter. But in regard to any fact, besides
the knowledge constituted by belief, we may also have the kind of
knowledge constituted by _perception_ (taking this word in its widest
possible sense). For example, if you know the hour of the sunset,
you can at that hour know the fact that the sun is setting: this is
knowledge of the fact by way of knowledge of _truths_; but you can also,
if the weather is fine, look to the west and actually see the setting
sun: you then know the same fact by the way of knowledge of _things_.

Thus in regard to any complex fact, there are, theoretically, two ways
in which it may be known: (1) by means of a judgement, in which its
several parts are judged to be related as they are in fact related; (2)
by means of _acquaintance_ with the complex fact itself, which may (in a
large sense) be called perception, though it is by no means confined to
objects of the senses. Now it will be observed that the second way of
knowing a complex fact, the way of acquaintance, is only possible when
there really is such a fact, while the first way, like all judgement,
is liable to error. The second way gives us the complex whole, and is
therefore only possible when its parts do actually have that relation
which makes them combine to form such a complex. The first way, on the
contrary, gives us the parts and the relation severally, and demands
only the reality of the parts and the relation: the relation may not
relate those parts in that way, and yet the judgement may occur.

It will be remembered that at the end of Chapter XI we suggested that
there might be two kinds of self-evidence, one giving an absolute
guarantee of truth, the other only a partial guarantee. These two kinds
can now be distinguished.

We may say that a truth is self-evident, in the first and most absolute
sense, when we have acquaintance with the fact which corresponds to
the truth. When Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio, the
corresponding fact, if his belief were true, would be 'Desdemona's
love for Cassio'. This would be a fact with which no one could have
acquaintance except Desdemona; hence in the sense of self-evidence that
we are considering, the truth that Desdemona loves Cassio (if it were
a truth) could only be self-evident to Desdemona. All mental facts, and
all facts concerning sense-data, have this same privacy: there is only
one person to whom they can be self-evident in our present sense, since
there is only one person who can be acquainted with the mental things
or the sense-data concerned. Thus no fact about any particular existing
thing can be self-evident to more than one person. On the other hand,
facts about universals do not have this privacy. Many minds may be
acquainted with the same universals; hence a relation between universals
may be known by acquaintance to many different people. In all cases
where we know by acquaintance a complex fact consisting of certain terms
in a certain relation, we say that the truth that these terms are so
related has the first or absolute kind of self-evidence, and in these
cases the judgement that the terms are so related _must_ be true. Thus
this sort of self-evidence is an absolute guarantee of truth.

But although this sort of self-evidence is an absolute guarantee of
truth, it does not enable us to be _absolutely_ certain, in the case of
any given judgement, that the judgement in question is true. Suppose
we first perceive the sun shining, which is a complex fact, and thence
proceed to make the judgement 'the sun is shining'. In passing from
the perception to the judgement, it is necessary to analyse the given
complex fact: we have to separate out 'the sun' and 'shining' as
constituents of the fact. In this process it is possible to commit
an error; hence even where a _fact_ has the first or absolute kind of
self-evidence, a judgement believed to correspond to the fact is not
absolutely infallible, because it may not really correspond to the
fact. But if it does correspond (in the sense explained in the preceding
chapter), then it _must_ be true.

The second sort of self-evidence will be that which belongs to
judgements in the first instance, and is not derived from direct
perception of a fact as a single complex whole. This second kind of
self-evidence will have degrees, from the very highest degree down to a
bare inclination in favour of the belief. Take, for example, the case of
a horse trotting away from us along a hard road. At first our certainty
that we hear the hoofs is complete; gradually, if we listen intently,
there comes a moment when we think perhaps it was imagination or the
blind upstairs or our own heartbeats; at last we become doubtful whether
there was any noise at all; then we _think_ we no longer hear anything,
and at last we _know_ we no longer hear anything. In this process, there
is a continual gradation of self-evidence, from the highest degree to
the least, not in the sense-data themselves, but in the judgements based
on them.

Or again: Suppose we are comparing two shades of colour, one blue and
one green. We can be quite sure they are different shades of colour; but
if the green colour is gradually altered to be more and more like the
blue, becoming first a blue-green, then a greeny-blue, then blue,
there will come a moment when we are doubtful whether we can see any
difference, and then a moment when we know that we cannot see any
difference. The same thing happens in tuning a musical instrument, or in
any other case where there is a continuous gradation. Thus self-evidence
of this sort is a matter of degree; and it seems plain that the higher
degrees are more to be trusted than the lower degrees.

In derivative knowledge our ultimate premisses must have some degree of
self-evidence, and so must their connexion with the conclusions deduced
from them. Take for example a piece of reasoning in geometry. It is not
enough that the axioms from which we start should be self-evident: it
is necessary also that, at each step in the reasoning, the connexion of
premiss and conclusion should be self-evident. In difficult reasoning,
this connexion has often only a very small degree of self-evidence;
hence errors of reasoning are not improbable where the difficulty is
great.

From what has been said it is evident that, both as regards intuitive
knowledge and as regards derivative knowledge, if we assume that
intuitive knowledge is trustworthy in proportion to the degree of its
self-evidence, there will be a gradation in trustworthiness, from the
existence of noteworthy sense-data and the simpler truths of logic and
arithmetic, which may be taken as quite certain, down to judgements
which seem only just more probable than their opposites. What we firmly
believe, if it is true, is called _knowledge_, provided it is either
intuitive or inferred (logically or psychologically) from intuitive
knowledge from which it follows logically. What we firmly believe, if it
is not true, is called _error_. What we firmly believe, if it is neither
knowledge nor error, and also what we believe hesitatingly, because it
is, or is derived from, something which has not the highest degree of
self-evidence, may be called _probable opinion_. Thus the greater
part of what would commonly pass as knowledge is more or less probable
opinion.

In regard to probable opinion, we can derive great assistance from
_coherence_, which we rejected as the _definition_ of truth, but may
often use as a _criterion_. A body of individually probable opinions,
if they are mutually coherent, become more probable than any one of them
would be individually. It is in this way that many scientific hypotheses
acquire their probability. They fit into a coherent system of probable
opinions, and thus become more probable than they would be in isolation.
The same thing applies to general philosophical hypotheses. Often in a
single case such hypotheses may seem highly doubtful, while yet, when
we consider the order and coherence which they introduce into a mass of
probable opinion, they become pretty nearly certain. This applies, in
particular, to such matters as the distinction between dreams and
waking life. If our dreams, night after night, were as coherent one with
another as our days, we should hardly know whether to believe the dreams
or the waking life. As it is, the test of coherence condemns the
dreams and confirms the waking life. But this test, though it increases
probability where it is successful, never gives absolute certainty,
unless there is certainty already at some point in the coherent system.
Thus the mere organization of probable opinion will never, by itself,
transform it into indubitable knowledge.



CHAPTER XIV. THE LIMITS OF PHILOSOPHICAL KNOWLEDGE

In all that we have said hitherto concerning philosophy, we have
scarcely touched on many matters that occupy a great space in the
writings of most philosophers. Most philosophers--or, at any rate, very
many--profess to be able to prove, by _a priori_ metaphysical reasoning,
such things as the fundamental dogmas of religion, the essential
rationality of the universe, the illusoriness of matter, the unreality
of all evil, and so on. There can be no doubt that the hope of finding
reason to believe such theses as these has been the chief inspiration of
many life-long students of philosophy. This hope, I believe, is vain. It
would seem that knowledge concerning the universe as a whole is not to
be obtained by metaphysics, and that the proposed proofs that, in virtue
of the laws of logic such and such things _must_ exist and such and such
others cannot, are not capable of surviving a critical scrutiny. In
this chapter we shall briefly consider the kind of way in which such
reasoning is attempted, with a view to discovering whether we can hope
that it may be valid.

The great representative, in modern times, of the kind of view which
we wish to examine, was Hegel (1770-1831). Hegel's philosophy is very
difficult, and commentators differ as to the true interpretation of it.
According to the interpretation I shall adopt, which is that of many, if
not most, of the commentators and has the merit of giving an interesting
and important type of philosophy, his main thesis is that everything
short of the Whole is obviously fragmentary, and obviously incapable of
existing without the complement supplied by the rest of the world. Just
as a comparative anatomist, from a single bone, sees what kind of animal
the whole must have been, so the metaphysician, according to Hegel,
sees, from any one piece of reality, what the whole of reality must
be--at least in its large outlines. Every apparently separate piece of
reality has, as it were, hooks which grapple it to the next piece;
the next piece, in turn, has fresh hooks, and so on, until the whole
universe is reconstructed. This essential incompleteness appears,
according to Hegel, equally in the world of thought and in the world of
things. In the world of thought, if we take any idea which is
abstract or incomplete, we find, on examination, that if we forget
its incompleteness, we become involved in contradictions; these
contradictions turn the idea in question into its opposite, or
antithesis; and in order to escape, we have to find a new, less
incomplete idea, which is the synthesis of our original idea and its
antithesis. This new idea, though less incomplete than the idea we
started with, will be found, nevertheless, to be still not wholly
complete, but to pass into its antithesis, with which it must be
combined in a new synthesis. In this way Hegel advances until he reaches
the 'Absolute Idea', which, according to him, has no incompleteness,
no opposite, and no need of further development. The Absolute Idea,
therefore, is adequate to describe Absolute Reality; but all lower ideas
only describe reality as it appears to a partial view, not as it is
to one who simultaneously surveys the Whole. Thus Hegel reaches the
conclusion that Absolute Reality forms one single harmonious system, not
in space or time, not in any degree evil, wholly rational, and wholly
spiritual. Any appearance to the contrary, in the world we know, can be
proved logically--so he believes--to be entirely due to our fragmentary
piecemeal view of the universe. If we saw the universe whole, as we may
suppose God sees it, space and time and matter and evil and all striving
and struggling would disappear, and we should see instead an eternal
perfect unchanging spiritual unity.

In this conception, there is undeniably something sublime, something to
which we could wish to yield assent. Nevertheless, when the arguments
in support of it are carefully examined, they appear to involve much
confusion and many unwarrantable assumptions. The fundamental tenet
upon which the system is built up is that what is incomplete must be not
self-subsistent, but must need the support of other things before it can
exist. It is held that whatever has relations to things outside itself
must contain some reference to those outside things in its own nature,
and could not, therefore, be what it is if those outside things did not
exist. A man's nature, for example, is constituted by his memories and
the rest of his knowledge, by his loves and hatreds, and so on; thus,
but for the objects which he knows or loves or hates, he could not be
what he is. He is essentially and obviously a fragment: taken as the
sum-total of reality he would be self-contradictory.

This whole point of view, however, turns upon the notion of the 'nature'
of a thing, which seems to mean 'all the truths about the thing'. It is
of course the case that a truth which connects one thing with another
thing could not subsist if the other thing did not subsist. But a
truth about a thing is not part of the thing itself, although it must,
according to the above usage, be part of the 'nature' of the thing.
If we mean by a thing's 'nature' all the truths about the thing, then
plainly we cannot know a thing's 'nature' unless we know all the thing's
relations to all the other things in the universe. But if the word
'nature' is used in this sense, we shall have to hold that the thing
may be known when its 'nature' is not known, or at any rate is not known
completely. There is a confusion, when this use of the word 'nature' is
employed, between knowledge of things and knowledge of truths. We may
have knowledge of a thing by acquaintance even if we know very few
propositions about it--theoretically we need not know any propositions
about it. Thus, acquaintance with a thing does not involve knowledge of
its 'nature' in the above sense. And although acquaintance with a thing
is involved in our knowing any one proposition about a thing, knowledge
of its 'nature', in the above sense, is not involved. Hence, (1)
acquaintance with a thing does not logically involve a knowledge of its
relations, and (2) a knowledge of some of its relations does not involve
a knowledge of all of its relations nor a knowledge of its 'nature' in
the above sense. I may be acquainted, for example, with my toothache,
and this knowledge may be as complete as knowledge by acquaintance ever
can be, without knowing all that the dentist (who is not acquainted
with it) can tell me about its cause, and without therefore knowing its
'nature' in the above sense. Thus the fact that a thing has relations
does not prove that its relations are logically necessary. That is to
say, from the mere fact that it is the thing it is we cannot deduce
that it must have the various relations which in fact it has. This only
_seems_ to follow because we know it already.

It follows that we cannot prove that the universe as a whole forms a
single harmonious system such as Hegel believes that it forms. And if we
cannot prove this, we also cannot prove the unreality of space and time
and matter and evil, for this is deduced by Hegel from the fragmentary
and relational character of these things. Thus we are left to the
piecemeal investigation of the world, and are unable to know the
characters of those parts of the universe that are remote from our
experience. This result, disappointing as it is to those whose hopes
have been raised by the systems of philosophers, is in harmony with
the inductive and scientific temper of our age, and is borne out by the
whole examination of human knowledge which has occupied our previous
chapters.

Most of the great ambitious attempts of metaphysicians have proceeded by
the attempt to prove that such and such apparent features of the actual
world were self-contradictory, and therefore could not be real. The
whole tendency of modern thought, however, is more and more in the
direction of showing that the supposed contradictions were illusory, and
that very little can be proved _a priori_ from considerations of what
_must_ be. A good illustration of this is afforded by space and
time. Space and time appear to be infinite in extent, and infinitely
divisible. If we travel along a straight line in either direction, it
is difficult to believe that we shall finally reach a last point,
beyond which there is nothing, not even empty space. Similarly, if in
imagination we travel backwards or forwards in time, it is difficult to
believe that we shall reach a first or last time, with not even empty
time beyond it. Thus space and time appear to be infinite in extent.

Again, if we take any two points on a line, it seems evident that there
must be other points between them however small the distance between
them may be: every distance can be halved, and the halves can be halved
again, and so on _ad infinitum_. In time, similarly, however little
time may elapse between two moments, it seems evident that there will be
other moments between them. Thus space and time appear to be infinitely
divisible. But as against these apparent facts--infinite extent and
infinite divisibility--philosophers have advanced arguments tending to
show that there could be no infinite collections of things, and that
therefore the number of points in space, or of instants in time, must
be finite. Thus a contradiction emerged between the apparent nature of
space and time and the supposed impossibility of infinite collections.

Kant, who first emphasized this contradiction, deduced the impossibility
of space and time, which he declared to be merely subjective; and since
his time very many philosophers have believed that space and time are
mere appearance, not characteristic of the world as it really is. Now,
however, owing to the labours of the mathematicians, notably Georg
Cantor, it has appeared that the impossibility of infinite collections
was a mistake. They are not in fact self-contradictory, but only
contradictory of certain rather obstinate mental prejudices. Hence the
reasons for regarding space and time as unreal have become inoperative,
and one of the great sources of metaphysical constructions is dried up.

The mathematicians, however, have not been content with showing that
space as it is commonly supposed to be is possible; they have shown also
that many other forms of space are equally possible, so far as logic
can show. Some of Euclid's axioms, which appear to common sense to be
necessary, and were formerly supposed to be necessary by philosophers,
are now known to derive their appearance of necessity from our mere
familiarity with actual space, and not from any _a priori_ logical
foundation. By imagining worlds in which these axioms are false, the
mathematicians have used logic to loosen the prejudices of common
sense, and to show the possibility of spaces differing--some more, some
less--from that in which we live. And some of these spaces differ so
little from Euclidean space, where distances such as we can measure are
concerned, that it is impossible to discover by observation whether our
actual space is strictly Euclidean or of one of these other kinds.
Thus the position is completely reversed. Formerly it appeared that
experience left only one kind of space to logic, and logic showed this
one kind to be impossible. Now, logic presents many kinds of space as
possible apart from experience, and experience only partially decides
between them. Thus, while our knowledge of what is has become less
than it was formerly supposed to be, our knowledge of what may be is
enormously increased. Instead of being shut in within narrow walls, of
which every nook and cranny could be explored, we find ourselves in an
open world of free possibilities, where much remains unknown because
there is so much to know.

What has happened in the case of space and time has happened, to some
extent, in other directions as well. The attempt to prescribe to the
universe by means of _a priori_ principles has broken down; logic,
instead of being, as formerly, the bar to possibilities, has become the
great liberator of the imagination, presenting innumerable alternatives
which are closed to unreflective common sense, and leaving to experience
the task of deciding, where decision is possible, between the many
worlds which logic offers for our choice. Thus knowledge as to what
exists becomes limited to what we can learn from experience--not to
what we can actually experience, for, as we have seen, there is much
knowledge by description concerning things of which we have no direct
experience. But in all cases of knowledge by description, we need some
connexion of universals, enabling us, from such and such a datum, to
infer an object of a certain sort as implied by our datum. Thus in
regard to physical objects, for example, the principle that sense-data
are signs of physical objects is itself a connexion of universals; and
it is only in virtue of this principle that experience enables us to
acquire knowledge concerning physical objects. The same applies to
the law of causality, or, to descend to what is less general, to such
principles as the law of gravitation.

Principles such as the law of gravitation are proved, or rather are
rendered highly probable, by a combination of experience with some
wholly _a priori_ principle, such as the principle of induction. Thus
our intuitive knowledge, which is the source of all our other knowledge
of truths, is of two sorts: pure empirical knowledge, which tells us of
the existence and some of the properties of particular things with
which we are acquainted, and pure _a priori_ knowledge, which gives us
connexions between universals, and enables us to draw inferences from
the particular facts given in empirical knowledge. Our derivative
knowledge always depends upon some pure _a priori_ knowledge and usually
also depends upon some pure empirical knowledge.

Philosophical knowledge, if what has been said above is true, does not
differ essentially from scientific knowledge; there is no special
source of wisdom which is open to philosophy but not to science, and the
results obtained by philosophy are not radically different from those
obtained from science. The essential characteristic of philosophy,
which makes it a study distinct from science, is criticism. It examines
critically the principles employed in science and in daily life; it
searches out any inconsistencies there may be in these principles,
and it only accepts them when, as the result of a critical inquiry, no
reason for rejecting them has appeared. If, as many philosophers have
believed, the principles underlying the sciences were capable, when
disengaged from irrelevant detail, of giving us knowledge concerning
the universe as a whole, such knowledge would have the same claim on our
belief as scientific knowledge has; but our inquiry has not revealed any
such knowledge, and therefore, as regards the special doctrines of the
bolder metaphysicians, has had a mainly negative result. But as regards
what would be commonly accepted as knowledge, our result is in the main
positive: we have seldom found reason to reject such knowledge as the
result of our criticism, and we have seen no reason to suppose man
incapable of the kind of knowledge which he is generally believed to
possess.

When, however, we speak of philosophy as a _criticism_ of knowledge, it
is necessary to impose a certain limitation. If we adopt the attitude
of the complete sceptic, placing ourselves wholly outside all knowledge,
and asking, from this outside position, to be compelled to return within
the circle of knowledge, we are demanding what is impossible, and our
scepticism can never be refuted. For all refutation must begin with
some piece of knowledge which the disputants share; from blank doubt,
no argument can begin. Hence the criticism of knowledge which philosophy
employs must not be of this destructive kind, if any result is to be
achieved. Against this absolute scepticism, no _logical_ argument can be
advanced. But it is not difficult to see that scepticism of this kind
is unreasonable. Descartes' 'methodical doubt', with which modern
philosophy began, is not of this kind, but is rather the kind of
criticism which we are asserting to be the essence of philosophy. His
'methodical doubt' consisted in doubting whatever seemed doubtful; in
pausing, with each apparent piece of knowledge, to ask himself whether,
on reflection, he could feel certain that he really knew it. This is the
kind of criticism which constitutes philosophy. Some knowledge, such as
knowledge of the existence of our sense-data, appears quite indubitable,
however calmly and thoroughly we reflect upon it. In regard to such
knowledge, philosophical criticism does not require that we should
abstain from belief. But there are beliefs--such, for example, as the
belief that physical objects exactly resemble our sense-data--which are
entertained until we begin to reflect, but are found to melt away
when subjected to a close inquiry. Such beliefs philosophy will bid us
reject, unless some new line of argument is found to support them.
But to reject the beliefs which do not appear open to any objections,
however closely we examine them, is not reasonable, and is not what
philosophy advocates.

The criticism aimed at, in a word, is not that which, without reason,
determines to reject, but that which considers each piece of apparent
knowledge on its merits, and retains whatever still appears to be
knowledge when this consideration is completed. That some risk of error
remains must be admitted, since human beings are fallible. Philosophy
may claim justly that it diminishes the risk of error, and that in some
cases it renders the risk so small as to be practically negligible. To
do more than this is not possible in a world where mistakes must occur;
and more than this no prudent advocate of philosophy would claim to have
performed.



CHAPTER XV. THE VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY

Having now come to the end of our brief and very incomplete review of
the problems of philosophy, it will be well to consider, in conclusion,
what is the value of philosophy and why it ought to be studied. It is
the more necessary to consider this question, in view of the fact that
many men, under the influence of science or of practical affairs, are
inclined to doubt whether philosophy is anything better than innocent
but useless trifling, hair-splitting distinctions, and controversies on
matters concerning which knowledge is impossible.

This view of philosophy appears to result, partly from a wrong
conception of the ends of life, partly from a wrong conception of the
kind of goods which philosophy strives to achieve. Physical science,
through the medium of inventions, is useful to innumerable people who
are wholly ignorant of it; thus the study of physical science is to
be recommended, not only, or primarily, because of the effect on the
student, but rather because of the effect on mankind in general. Thus
utility does not belong to philosophy. If the study of philosophy has
any value at all for others than students of philosophy, it must be only
indirectly, through its effects upon the lives of those who study it.
It is in these effects, therefore, if anywhere, that the value of
philosophy must be primarily sought.

But further, if we are not to fail in our endeavour to determine the
value of philosophy, we must first free our minds from the prejudices
of what are wrongly called 'practical' men. The 'practical' man, as
this word is often used, is one who recognizes only material needs, who
realizes that men must have food for the body, but is oblivious of the
necessity of providing food for the mind. If all men were well off, if
poverty and disease had been reduced to their lowest possible point,
there would still remain much to be done to produce a valuable society;
and even in the existing world the goods of the mind are at least as
important as the goods of the body. It is exclusively among the goods of
the mind that the value of philosophy is to be found; and only those who
are not indifferent to these goods can be persuaded that the study of
philosophy is not a waste of time.

Philosophy, like all other studies, aims primarily at knowledge. The
knowledge it aims at is the kind of knowledge which gives unity and
system to the body of the sciences, and the kind which results from a
critical examination of the grounds of our convictions, prejudices, and
beliefs. But it cannot be maintained that philosophy has had any very
great measure of success in its attempts to provide definite answers to
its questions. If you ask a mathematician, a mineralogist, a historian,
or any other man of learning, what definite body of truths has been
ascertained by his science, his answer will last as long as you are
willing to listen. But if you put the same question to a philosopher, he
will, if he is candid, have to confess that his study has not achieved
positive results such as have been achieved by other sciences. It is
true that this is partly accounted for by the fact that, as soon as
definite knowledge concerning any subject becomes possible, this subject
ceases to be called philosophy, and becomes a separate science. The
whole study of the heavens, which now belongs to astronomy, was once
included in philosophy; Newton's great work was called 'the mathematical
principles of natural philosophy'. Similarly, the study of the human
mind, which was a part of philosophy, has now been separated from
philosophy and has become the science of psychology. Thus, to a great
extent, the uncertainty of philosophy is more apparent than real: those
questions which are already capable of definite answers are placed in
the sciences, while those only to which, at present, no definite answer
can be given, remain to form the residue which is called philosophy.

This is, however, only a part of the truth concerning the uncertainty of
philosophy. There are many questions--and among them those that are of
the profoundest interest to our spiritual life--which, so far as we
can see, must remain insoluble to the human intellect unless its powers
become of quite a different order from what they are now. Has the
universe any unity of plan or purpose, or is it a fortuitous concourse
of atoms? Is consciousness a permanent part of the universe, giving
hope of indefinite growth in wisdom, or is it a transitory accident on
a small planet on which life must ultimately become impossible? Are good
and evil of importance to the universe or only to man? Such questions
are asked by philosophy, and variously answered by various philosophers.
But it would seem that, whether answers be otherwise discoverable or
not, the answers suggested by philosophy are none of them demonstrably
true. Yet, however slight may be the hope of discovering an answer, it
is part of the business of philosophy to continue the consideration of
such questions, to make us aware of their importance, to examine all the
approaches to them, and to keep alive that speculative interest in the
universe which is apt to be killed by confining ourselves to definitely
ascertainable knowledge.

Many philosophers, it is true, have held that philosophy could establish
the truth of certain answers to such fundamental questions. They have
supposed that what is of most importance in religious beliefs could be
proved by strict demonstration to be true. In order to judge of such
attempts, it is necessary to take a survey of human knowledge, and to
form an opinion as to its methods and its limitations. On such a subject
it would be unwise to pronounce dogmatically; but if the investigations
of our previous chapters have not led us astray, we shall be compelled
to renounce the hope of finding philosophical proofs of religious
beliefs. We cannot, therefore, include as part of the value of
philosophy any definite set of answers to such questions. Hence, once
more, the value of philosophy must not depend upon any supposed body of
definitely ascertainable knowledge to be acquired by those who study it.

The value of philosophy is, in fact, to be sought largely in its very
uncertainty. The man who has no tincture of philosophy goes through
life imprisoned in the prejudices derived from common sense, from the
habitual beliefs of his age or his nation, and from convictions which
have grown up in his mind without the co-operation or consent of his
deliberate reason. To such a man the world tends to become definite,
finite, obvious; common objects rouse no questions, and unfamiliar
possibilities are contemptuously rejected. As soon as we begin to
philosophize, on the contrary, we find, as we saw in our opening
chapters, that even the most everyday things lead to problems to which
only very incomplete answers can be given. Philosophy, though unable to
tell us with certainty what is the true answer to the doubts which it
raises, is able to suggest many possibilities which enlarge our thoughts
and free them from the tyranny of custom. Thus, while diminishing our
feeling of certainty as to what things are, it greatly increases our
knowledge as to what they may be; it removes the somewhat arrogant
dogmatism of those who have never travelled into the region of
liberating doubt, and it keeps alive our sense of wonder by showing
familiar things in an unfamiliar aspect.

Apart from its utility in showing unsuspected possibilities, philosophy
has a value--perhaps its chief value--through the greatness of the
objects which it contemplates, and the freedom from narrow and personal
aims resulting from this contemplation. The life of the instinctive
man is shut up within the circle of his private interests: family and
friends may be included, but the outer world is not regarded except
as it may help or hinder what comes within the circle of instinctive
wishes. In such a life there is something feverish and confined, in
comparison with which the philosophic life is calm and free. The private
world of instinctive interests is a small one, set in the midst of a
great and powerful world which must, sooner or later, lay our private
world in ruins. Unless we can so enlarge our interests as to include the
whole outer world, we remain like a garrison in a beleagured fortress,
knowing that the enemy prevents escape and that ultimate surrender is
inevitable. In such a life there is no peace, but a constant strife
between the insistence of desire and the powerlessness of will. In one
way or another, if our life is to be great and free, we must escape this
prison and this strife.

One way of escape is by philosophic contemplation. Philosophic
contemplation does not, in its widest survey, divide the universe into
two hostile camps--friends and foes, helpful and hostile, good and
bad--it views the whole impartially. Philosophic contemplation, when it
is unalloyed, does not aim at proving that the rest of the universe is
akin to man. All acquisition of knowledge is an enlargement of the Self,
but this enlargement is best attained when it is not directly sought. It
is obtained when the desire for knowledge is alone operative, by a study
which does not wish in advance that its objects should have this or that
character, but adapts the Self to the characters which it finds in its
objects. This enlargement of Self is not obtained when, taking the Self
as it is, we try to show that the world is so similar to this Self that
knowledge of it is possible without any admission of what seems alien.
The desire to prove this is a form of self-assertion and, like all
self-assertion, it is an obstacle to the growth of Self which it
desires, and of which the Self knows that it is capable. Self-assertion,
in philosophic speculation as elsewhere, views the world as a means to
its own ends; thus it makes the world of less account than Self, and the
Self sets bounds to the greatness of its goods. In contemplation, on
the contrary, we start from the not-Self, and through its greatness the
boundaries of Self are enlarged; through the infinity of the universe
the mind which contemplates it achieves some share in infinity.

For this reason greatness of soul is not fostered by those philosophies
which assimilate the universe to Man. Knowledge is a form of union
of Self and not-Self; like all union, it is impaired by dominion, and
therefore by any attempt to force the universe into conformity with
what we find in ourselves. There is a widespread philosophical tendency
towards the view which tells us that Man is the measure of all things,
that truth is man-made, that space and time and the world of universals
are properties of the mind, and that, if there be anything not created
by the mind, it is unknowable and of no account for us. This view, if
our previous discussions were correct, is untrue; but in addition to
being untrue, it has the effect of robbing philosophic contemplation of
all that gives it value, since it fetters contemplation to Self. What
it calls knowledge is not a union with the not-Self, but a set of
prejudices, habits, and desires, making an impenetrable veil between
us and the world beyond. The man who finds pleasure in such a theory of
knowledge is like the man who never leaves the domestic circle for fear
his word might not be law.

The true philosophic contemplation, on the contrary, finds its
satisfaction in every enlargement of the not-Self, in everything
that magnifies the objects contemplated, and thereby the subject
contemplating. Everything, in contemplation, that is personal or
private, everything that depends upon habit, self-interest, or desire,
distorts the object, and hence impairs the union which the intellect
seeks. By thus making a barrier between subject and object, such
personal and private things become a prison to the intellect. The free
intellect will see as God might see, without a _here_ and _now_,
without hopes and fears, without the trammels of customary beliefs
and traditional prejudices, calmly, dispassionately, in the sole and
exclusive desire of knowledge--knowledge as impersonal, as purely
contemplative, as it is possible for man to attain. Hence also the free
intellect will value more the abstract and universal knowledge into
which the accidents of private history do not enter, than the knowledge
brought by the senses, and dependent, as such knowledge must be, upon
an exclusive and personal point of view and a body whose sense-organs
distort as much as they reveal.

The mind which has become accustomed to the freedom and impartiality of
philosophic contemplation will preserve something of the same freedom
and impartiality in the world of action and emotion. It will view
its purposes and desires as parts of the whole, with the absence of
insistence that results from seeing them as infinitesimal fragments in
a world of which all the rest is unaffected by any one man's deeds. The
impartiality which, in contemplation, is the unalloyed desire for truth,
is the very same quality of mind which, in action, is justice, and in
emotion is that universal love which can be given to all, and not only
to those who are judged useful or admirable. Thus contemplation enlarges
not only the objects of our thoughts, but also the objects of our
actions and our affections: it makes us citizens of the universe, not
only of one walled city at war with all the rest. In this citizenship
of the universe consists man's true freedom, and his liberation from the
thraldom of narrow hopes and fears.

Thus, to sum up our discussion of the value of philosophy; Philosophy
is to be studied, not for the sake of any definite answers to its
questions, since no definite answers can, as a rule, be known to be
true, but rather for the sake of the questions themselves; because
these questions enlarge our conception of what is possible, enrich
our intellectual imagination and diminish the dogmatic assurance which
closes the mind against speculation; but above all because, through the
greatness of the universe which philosophy contemplates, the mind also
is rendered great, and becomes capable of that union with the universe
which constitutes its highest good.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

The student who wishes to acquire an elementary knowledge of philosophy
will find it both easier and more profitable to read some of the works
of the great philosophers than to attempt to derive an all-round view
from handbooks. The following are specially recommended:

     Plato: _Republic_, especially Books VI and VII.
     Descartes: _Meditations_.
     Spinoza: _Ethics_.
     Leibniz: _The Monadology_.
     Berkeley: _Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous_.
     Hume: _Enquiry concerning Human Understanding_.
     Kant: _Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysic_.
     
     
     PREFACE


The following essays have been written and published at various times,
and my thanks are due to the previous publishers for the permission to
reprint them.

The essay on "Mysticism and Logic" appeared in the _Hibbert Journal_
for July, 1914. "The Place of Science in a Liberal Education" appeared
in two numbers of _The New Statesman_, May 24 and 31, 1913. "The Free
Man's Worship" and "The Study of Mathematics" were included in a
former collection (now out of print), _Philosophical Essays_, also
published by Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co. Both were written in 1902;
the first appeared originally in the _Independent Review_ for 1903,
the second in the _New Quarterly_, November, 1907. In theoretical
Ethics, the position advocated in "The Free Man's Worship" is not
quite identical with that which I hold now: I feel less convinced than
I did then of the objectivity of good and evil. But the general
attitude towards life which is suggested in that essay still seems to
me, in the main, the one which must be adopted in times of stress and
difficulty by those who have no dogmatic religious beliefs, if inward
defeat is to be avoided.

The essay on "Mathematics and the Metaphysicians" was written in 1901,
and appeared in an American magazine, _The International Monthly_,
under the title "Recent Work in the Philosophy of Mathematics." Some
points in this essay require modification in view of later work.
These are indicated in footnotes. Its tone is partly explained by the
fact that the editor begged me to make the article "as romantic as
possible."

All the above essays are entirely popular, but those that follow are
somewhat more technical. "On Scientific Method in Philosophy" was the
Herbert Spencer lecture at Oxford in 1914, and was published by the
Clarendon Press, which has kindly allowed me to include it in this
collection. "The Ultimate Constituents of Matter" was an address to
the Manchester Philosophical Society, early in 1915, and was published
in the _Monist_ in July of that year. The essay on "The Relation of
Sense-data to Physics" was written in January, 1914, and first
appeared in No. 4 of that year's volume of _Scientia_, an
International Review of Scientific Synthesis, edited by M. Eugenio
Rignano, published monthly by Messrs. Williams and Norgate, London,
Nicola Zanichelli, Bologna, and Flix Alcan, Paris. The essay "On the
Notion of Cause" was the presidential address to the Aristotelian
Society in November, 1912, and was published in their _Proceedings_
for 1912-13. "Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description"
was also a paper read before the Aristotelian Society, and published
in their _Proceedings_ for 1910-11.

  LONDON,
    _September, 1917_




CONTENTS


_Chapter_                                                  _Page_

   I. _Mysticism and Logic_                                     1

  II. _The Place of Science in a Liberal Education_            33

 III. _A Free Man's Worship_                                   46

  IV. _The Study of Mathematics_                               58

   V. _Mathematics and the Metaphysicians_                     74

  VI. _On Scientific Method in Philosophy_                     97

 VII. _The Ultimate Constituents of Matter_                   125

VIII. _The Relation of Sense-data to Physics_                 145

  IX. _On the Notion of Cause_                                180

   X. _Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by
       Description_                                           209




MYSTICISM AND LOGIC AND OTHER ESSAYS




I

MYSTICISM AND LOGIC


Metaphysics, or the attempt to conceive the world as a whole by means
of thought, has been developed, from the first, by the union and
conflict of two very different human impulses, the one urging men
towards mysticism, the other urging them towards science. Some men
have achieved greatness through one of these impulses alone, others
through the other alone: in Hume, for example, the scientific impulse
reigns quite unchecked, while in Blake a strong hostility to science
co-exists with profound mystic insight. But the greatest men who have
been philosophers have felt the need both of science and of mysticism:
the attempt to harmonise the two was what made their life, and what
always must, for all its arduous uncertainty, make philosophy, to some
minds, a greater thing than either science or religion.

Before attempting an explicit characterisation of the scientific and
the mystical impulses, I will illustrate them by examples from two
philosophers whose greatness lies in the very intimate blending which
they achieved. The two philosophers I mean are Heraclitus and Plato.

Heraclitus, as every one knows, was a believer in universal flux: time
builds and destroys all things. From the few fragments that remain, it
is not easy to discover how he arrived at his opinions, but there are
some sayings that strongly suggest scientific observation as the
source.

"The things that can be seen, heard, and learned," he says, "are what
I prize the most." This is the language of the empiricist, to whom
observation is the sole guarantee of truth. "The sun is new every
day," is another fragment; and this opinion, in spite of its
paradoxical character, is obviously inspired by scientific reflection,
and no doubt seemed to him to obviate the difficulty of understanding
how the sun can work its way underground from west to east during the
night. Actual observation must also have suggested to him his central
doctrine, that Fire is the one permanent substance, of which all
visible things are passing phases. In combustion we see things change
utterly, while their flame and heat rise up into the air and vanish.

"This world, which is the same for all," he says, "no one of gods or
men has made; but it was ever, is now, and ever shall be, an
ever-living Fire, with measures kindling, and measures going out."

"The transformations of Fire are, first of all, sea; and half of the
sea is earth, half whirlwind."

This theory, though no longer one which science can accept, is
nevertheless scientific in spirit. Science, too, might have inspired
the famous saying to which Plato alludes: "You cannot step twice into
the same rivers; for fresh waters are ever flowing in upon you." But
we find also another statement among the extant fragments: "We step
and do not step into the same rivers; we are and are not."

The comparison of this statement, which is mystical, with the one
quoted by Plato, which is scientific, shows how intimately the two
tendencies are blended in the system of Heraclitus. Mysticism is, in
essence, little more than a certain intensity and depth of feeling in
regard to what is believed about the universe; and this kind of
feeling leads Heraclitus, on the basis of his science, to strangely
poignant sayings concerning life and the world, such as:

"Time is a child playing draughts, the kingly power is a child's."

It is poetic imagination, not science, which presents Time as despotic
lord of the world, with all the irresponsible frivolity of a child. It
is mysticism, too, which leads Heraclitus to assert the identity of
opposites: "Good and ill are one," he says; and again: "To God all
things are fair and good and right, but men hold some things wrong and
some right."

Much of mysticism underlies the ethics of Heraclitus. It is true that
a scientific determinism alone might have inspired the statement:
"Man's character is his fate"; but only a mystic would have said:

"Every beast is driven to the pasture with blows"; and again:

"It is hard to fight with one's heart's desire. Whatever it wishes to
get, it purchases at the cost of soul"; and again:

"Wisdom is one thing. It is to know the thought by which all things
are steered through all things."[1]

Examples might be multiplied, but those that have been given are
enough to show the character of the man: the facts of science, as they
appeared to him, fed the flame in his soul, and in its light he saw
into the depths of the world by the reflection of his own dancing
swiftly penetrating fire. In such a nature we see the true union of
the mystic and the man of science--the highest eminence, as I think,
that it is possible to achieve in the world of thought.

In Plato, the same twofold impulse exists, though the mystic impulse
is distinctly the stronger of the two, and secures ultimate victory
whenever the conflict is sharp. His description of the cave is the
classical statement of belief in a knowledge and reality truer and
more real than that of the senses:

  "Imagine[2] a number of men living in an underground cavernous
  chamber, with an entrance open to the light, extending along the
  entire length of the cavern, in which they have been confined, from
  their childhood, with their legs and necks so shackled that they
  are obliged to sit still and look straight forwards, because their
  chains render it impossible for them to turn their heads round: and
  imagine a bright fire burning some way off, above and behind them,
  and an elevated roadway passing between the fire and the prisoners,
  with a low wall built along it, like the screens which conjurors
  put up in front of their audience, and above which they exhibit
  their wonders.

  I have it, he replied.

  Also figure to yourself a number of persons walking behind this
  wall, and carrying with them statues of men, and images of other
  animals, wrought in wood and stone and all kinds of materials,
  together with various other articles, which overtop the wall; and,
  as you might expect, let some of the passers-by be talking, and
  others silent.

  You are describing a strange scene, and strange prisoners.

  They resemble us, I replied.

  Now consider what would happen if the course of nature brought them
  a release from their fetters, and a remedy for their foolishness,
  in the following manner. Let us suppose that one of them has been
  released, and compelled suddenly to stand up, and turn his neck
  round and walk with open eyes towards the light; and let us suppose
  that he goes through all these actions with pain, and that the
  dazzling splendour renders him incapable of discerning those
  objects of which he used formerly to see the shadows. What answer
  should you expect him to make, if some one were to tell him that in
  those days he was watching foolish phantoms, but that now he is
  somewhat nearer to reality, and is turned towards things more real,
  and sees more correctly; above all, if he were to point out to him
  the several objects that are passing by, and question him, and
  compel him to answer what they are? Should you not expect him to be
  puzzled, and to regard his old visions as truer than the objects
  now forced upon his notice?

  Yes, much truer....

  Hence, I suppose, habit will be necessary to enable him to perceive
  objects in that upper world. At first he will be most successful in
  distinguishing shadows; then he will discern the reflections of men
  and other things in water, and afterwards the realities; and after
  this he will raise his eyes to encounter the light of the moon and
  stars, finding it less difficult to study the heavenly bodies and
  the heaven itself by night, than the sun and the sun's light by
  day.

  Doubtless.

  Last of all, I imagine, he will be able to observe and contemplate
  the nature of the sun, not as it _appears_ in water or on alien
  ground, but as it is in itself in its own territory.

  Of course.

  His next step will be to draw the conclusion, that the sun is the
  author of the seasons and the years, and the guardian of all things
  in the visible world, and in a manner the cause of all those things
  which he and his companions used to see.

  Obviously, this will be his next step....

  Now this imaginary case, my dear Glancon, you must apply in all its
  parts to our former statements, by comparing the region which the
  eye reveals to the prison house, and the light of the fire therein
  to the power of the sun: and if, by the upward ascent and the
  contemplation of the upper world, you understand the mounting of
  the soul into the intellectual region, you will hit the tendency of
  my own surmises, since you desire to be told what they are; though,
  indeed, God only knows whether they are correct. But, be that as it
  may, the view which I take of the subject is to the following
  effect. In the world of knowledge, the essential Form of Good is
  the limit of our enquiries, and can barely be perceived; but, when
  perceived, we cannot help concluding that it is in every case the
  source of all that is bright and beautiful,--in the visible world
  giving birth to light and its master, and in the intellectual world
  dispensing, immediately and with full authority, truth and
  reason;--and that whosoever would act wisely, either in private or
  in public, must set this Form of Good before his eyes."

But in this passage, as throughout most of Plato's teaching, there is
an identification of the good with the truly real, which became
embodied in the philosophical tradition, and is still largely
operative in our own day. In thus allowing a legislative function to
the good, Plato produced a divorce between philosophy and science,
from which, in my opinion, both have suffered ever since and are still
suffering. The man of science, whatever his hopes may be, must lay
them aside while he studies nature; and the philosopher, if he is to
achieve truth, must do the same. Ethical considerations can only
legitimately appear when the truth has been ascertained: they can and
should appear as determining our feeling towards the truth, and our
manner of ordering our lives in view of the truth, but not as
themselves dictating what the truth is to be.

There are passages in Plato--among those which illustrate the
scientific side of his mind--where he seems clearly aware of this. The
most noteworthy is the one in which Socrates, as a young man, is
explaining the theory of ideas to Parmenides.

After Socrates has explained that there is an idea of the good, but
not of such things as hair and mud and dirt, Parmenides advises him
"not to despise even the meanest things," and this advice shows the
genuine scientific temper. It is with this impartial temper that the
mystic's apparent insight into a higher reality and a hidden good has
to be combined if philosophy is to realise its greatest possibilities.
And it is failure in this respect that has made so much of idealistic
philosophy thin, lifeless, and insubstantial. It is only in marriage
with the world that our ideals can bear fruit: divorced from it, they
remain barren. But marriage with the world is not to be achieved by an
ideal which shrinks from fact, or demands in advance that the world
shall conform to its desires.

Parmenides himself is the source of a peculiarly interesting strain
of mysticism which pervades Plato's thought--the mysticism which may
be called "logical" because it is embodied in theories on logic. This
form of mysticism, which appears, so far as the West is concerned, to
have originated with Parmenides, dominates the reasonings of all the
great mystical metaphysicians from his day to that of Hegel and his
modern disciples. Reality, he says, is uncreated, indestructible,
unchanging, indivisible; it is "immovable in the bonds of mighty
chains, without beginning and without end; since coming into being and
passing away have been driven afar, and true belief has cast them
away." The fundamental principle of his inquiry is stated in a
sentence which would not be out of place in Hegel: "Thou canst not
know what is not--that is impossible--nor utter it; for it is the same
thing that can be thought and that can be." And again: "It needs must
be that what can be thought and spoken of is; for it is possible for
it to be, and it is not possible for what is nothing to be." The
impossibility of change follows from this principle; for what is past
can be spoken of, and therefore, by the principle, still is.

Mystical philosophy, in all ages and in all parts of the world, is
characterised by certain beliefs which are illustrated by the
doctrines we have been considering.

There is, first, the belief in insight as against discursive analytic
knowledge: the belief in a way of wisdom, sudden, penetrating,
coercive, which is contrasted with the slow and fallible study of
outward appearance by a science relying wholly upon the senses. All
who are capable of absorption in an inward passion must have
experienced at times the strange feeling of unreality in common
objects, the loss of contact with daily things, in which the solidity
of the outer world is lost, and the soul seems, in utter loneliness,
to bring forth, out of its own depths, the mad dance of fantastic
phantoms which have hitherto appeared as independently real and
living. This is the negative side of the mystic's initiation: the
doubt concerning common knowledge, preparing the way for the reception
of what seems a higher wisdom. Many men to whom this negative
experience is familiar do not pass beyond it, but for the mystic it is
merely the gateway to an ampler world.

The mystic insight begins with the sense of a mystery unveiled, of a
hidden wisdom now suddenly become certain beyond the possibility of a
doubt. The sense of certainty and revelation comes earlier than any
definite belief. The definite beliefs at which mystics arrive are the
result of reflection upon the inarticulate experience gained in the
moment of insight. Often, beliefs which have no real connection with
this moment become subsequently attracted into the central nucleus;
thus in addition to the convictions which all mystics share, we find,
in many of them, other convictions of a more local and temporary
character, which no doubt become amalgamated with what was essentially
mystical in virtue of their subjective certainty. We may ignore such
inessential accretions, and confine ourselves to the beliefs which all
mystics share.

The first and most direct outcome of the moment of illumination is
belief in the possibility of a way of knowledge which may be called
revelation or insight or intuition, as contrasted with sense, reason,
and analysis, which are regarded as blind guides leading to the morass
of illusion. Closely connected with this belief is the conception of a
Reality behind the world of appearance and utterly different from it.
This Reality is regarded with an admiration often amounting to
worship; it is felt to be always and everywhere close at hand, thinly
veiled by the shows of sense, ready, for the receptive mind, to shine
in its glory even through the apparent folly and wickedness of Man.
The poet, the artist, and the lover are seekers after that glory: the
haunting beauty that they pursue is the faint reflection of its sun.
But the mystic lives in the full light of the vision: what others
dimly seek he knows, with a knowledge beside which all other knowledge
is ignorance.

The second characteristic of mysticism is its belief in unity, and its
refusal to admit opposition or division anywhere. We found Heraclitus
saying "good and ill are one"; and again he says, "the way up and the
way down is one and the same." The same attitude appears in the
simultaneous assertion of contradictory propositions, such as: "We
step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and are not." The
assertion of Parmenides, that reality is one and indivisible, comes
from the same impulse towards unity. In Plato, this impulse is less
prominent, being held in check by his theory of ideas; but it
reappears, so far as his logic permits, in the doctrine of the primacy
of the Good.

A third mark of almost all mystical metaphysics is the denial of the
reality of Time. This is an outcome of the denial of division; if all
is one, the distinction of past and future must be illusory. We have
seen this doctrine prominent in Parmenides; and among moderns it is
fundamental in the systems of Spinoza and Hegel.

The last of the doctrines of mysticism which we have to consider is
its belief that all evil is mere appearance, an illusion produced by
the divisions and oppositions of the analytic intellect. Mysticism
does not maintain that such things as cruelty, for example, are good,
but it denies that they are real: they belong to that lower world of
phantoms from which we are to be liberated by the insight of the
vision. Sometimes--for example in Hegel, and at least verbally in
Spinoza--not only evil, but good also, is regarded as illusory, though
nevertheless the emotional attitude towards what is held to be Reality
is such as would naturally be associated with the belief that Reality
is good. What is, in all cases, ethically characteristic of mysticism
is absence of indignation or protest, acceptance with joy, disbelief
in the ultimate truth of the division into two hostile camps, the good
and the bad. This attitude is a direct outcome of the nature of the
mystical experience: with its sense of unity is associated a feeling
of infinite peace. Indeed it may be suspected that the feeling of
peace produces, as feelings do in dreams, the whole system of
associated beliefs which make up the body of mystic doctrine. But this
is a difficult question, and one on which it cannot be hoped that
mankind will reach agreement.

Four questions thus arise in considering the truth or falsehood of
mysticism, namely:

  I. Are there two ways of knowing, which may be called respectively
  reason and intuition? And if so, is either to be preferred to the
  other?

  II. Is all plurality and division illusory?

  III. Is time unreal?

  IV. What kind of reality belongs to good and evil?

On all four of these questions, while fully developed mysticism seems
to me mistaken, I yet believe that, by sufficient restraint, there is
an element of wisdom to be learned from the mystical way of feeling,
which does not seem to be attainable in any other manner. If this is
the truth, mysticism is to be commended as an attitude towards life,
not as a creed about the world. The meta-physical creed, I shall
maintain, is a mistaken outcome of the emotion, although this emotion,
as colouring and informing all other thoughts and feelings, is the
inspirer of whatever is best in Man. Even the cautious and patient
investigation of truth by science, which seems the very antithesis of
the mystic's swift certainty, may be fostered and nourished by that
very spirit of reverence in which mysticism lives and moves.


I. REASON AND INTUITION[3]

Of the reality or unreality of the mystic's world I know nothing. I
have no wish to deny it, nor even to declare that the insight which
reveals it is not a genuine insight. What I do wish to maintain--and
it is here that the scientific attitude becomes imperative--is that
insight, untested and unsupported, is an insufficient guarantee of
truth, in spite of the fact that much of the most important truth is
first suggested by its means. It is common to speak of an opposition
between instinct and reason; in the eighteenth century, the opposition
was drawn in favour of reason, but under the influence of Rousseau and
the romantic movement instinct was given the preference, first by
those who rebelled against artificial forms of government and thought,
and then, as the purely rationalistic defence of traditional theology
became increasingly difficult, by all who felt in science a menace to
creeds which they associated with a spiritual outlook on life and the
world. Bergson, under the name of "intuition," has raised instinct to
the position of sole arbiter of metaphysical truth. But in fact the
opposition of instinct and reason is mainly illusory. Instinct,
intuition, or insight is what first leads to the beliefs which
subsequent reason confirms or confutes; but the confirmation, where it
is possible, consists, in the last analysis, of agreement with other
beliefs no less instinctive. Reason is a harmonising, controlling
force rather than a creative one. Even in the most purely logical
realm, it is insight that first arrives at what is new.

Where instinct and reason do sometimes conflict is in regard to single
beliefs, held instinctively, and held with such determination that no
degree of inconsistency with other beliefs leads to their abandonment.
Instinct, like all human faculties, is liable to error. Those in whom
reason is weak are often unwilling to admit this as regards
themselves, though all admit it in regard to others. Where instinct is
least liable to error is in practical matters as to which right
judgment is a help to survival: friendship and hostility in others,
for instance, are often felt with extraordinary discrimination through
very careful disguises. But even in such matters a wrong impression
may be given by reserve or flattery; and in matters less directly
practical, such as philosophy deals with, very strong instinctive
beliefs are sometimes wholly mistaken, as we may come to know through
their perceived inconsistency with other equally strong beliefs. It is
such considerations that necessitate the harmonising mediation of
reason, which tests our beliefs by their mutual compatibility, and
examines, in doubtful cases, the possible sources of error on the one
side and on the other. In this there is no opposition to instinct as a
whole, but only to blind reliance upon some one interesting aspect of
instinct to the exclusion of other more commonplace but not less
trustworthy aspects. It is such one-sidedness, not instinct itself,
that reason aims at correcting.

These more or less trite maxims may be illustrated by application to
Bergson's advocacy of "intuition" as against "intellect." There are,
he says, "two profoundly different ways of knowing a thing. The first
implies that we move round the object: the second that we enter into
it. The first depends on the point of view at which we are placed and
on the symbols by which we express ourselves. The second neither
depends on a point of view nor relies on any symbol. The first kind of
knowledge may be said to stop at the _relative_; the second, in those
cases where it is possible, to attain the _absolute_."[4] The second
of these, which is intuition, is, he says, "the kind of _intellectual
sympathy_ by which one places oneself within an object in order to
coincide with what is unique in it and therefore inexpressible" (p.
6). In illustration, he mentions self-knowledge: "there is one
reality, at least, which we all seize from within, by intuition and
not by simple analysis. It is our own personality in its flowing
through time--our self which endures" (p. 8). The rest of Bergson's
philosophy consists in reporting, through the imperfect medium of
words, the knowledge gained by intuition, and the consequent complete
condemnation of all the pretended knowledge derived from science and
common sense.

This procedure, since it takes sides in a conflict of instinctive
beliefs, stands in need of justification by proving the greater
trustworthiness of the beliefs on one side than of those on the other.
Bergson attempts this justification in two ways, first by explaining
that intellect is a purely practical faculty to secure biological
success, secondly by mentioning remarkable feats of instinct in
animals and by pointing out characteristics of the world which, though
intuition can apprehend them, are baffling to intellect as he
interprets it.

Of Bergson's theory that intellect is a purely practical faculty,
developed in the struggle for survival, and not a source of true
beliefs, we may say, first, that it is only through intellect that we
know of the struggle for survival and of the biological ancestry of
man: if the intellect is misleading, the whole of this merely inferred
history is presumably untrue. If, on the other hand, we agree with him
in thinking that evolution took place as Darwin believed, then it is
not only intellect, but all our faculties, that have been developed
under the stress of practical utility. Intuition is seen at its best
where it is directly useful, for example in regard to other people's
characters and dispositions. Bergson apparently holds that capacity
for this kind of knowledge is less explicable by the struggle for
existence than, for example, capacity for pure mathematics. Yet the
savage deceived by false friendship is likely to pay for his mistake
with his life; whereas even in the most civilised societies men are
not put to death for mathematical incompetence. All the most striking
of his instances of intuition in animals have a very direct survival
value. The fact is, of course, that both intuition and intellect have
been developed because they are useful, and that, speaking broadly,
they are useful when they give truth and become harmful when they give
falsehood. Intellect, in civilised man, like artistic capacity, has
occasionally been developed beyond the point where it is useful to the
individual; intuition, on the other hand, seems on the whole to
diminish as civilisation increases. It is greater, as a rule, in
children than in adults, in the uneducated than in the educated.
Probably in dogs it exceeds anything to be found in human beings. But
those who see in these facts a recommendation of intuition ought to
return to running wild in the woods, dyeing themselves with woad and
living on hips and haws.

Let us next examine whether intuition possesses any such infallibility
as Bergson claims for it. The best instance of it, according to him,
is our acquaintance with ourselves; yet self-knowledge is proverbially
rare and difficult. Most men, for example, have in their nature
meannesses, vanities, and envies of which they are quite unconscious,
though even their best friends can perceive them without any
difficulty. It is true that intuition has a convincingness which is
lacking to intellect: while it is present, it is almost impossible to
doubt its truth. But if it should appear, on examination, to be at
least as fallible as intellect, its greater subjective certainty
becomes a demerit, making it only the more irresistibly deceptive.
Apart from self-knowledge, one of the most notable examples of
intuition is the knowledge people believe themselves to possess of
those with whom they are in love: the wall between different
personalities seems to become transparent, and people think they see
into another soul as into their own. Yet deception in such cases is
constantly practised with success; and even where there is no
intentional deception, experience gradually proves, as a rule, that
the supposed insight was illusory, and that the slower more groping
methods of the intellect are in the long run more reliable.

Bergson maintains that intellect can only deal with things in so far
as they resemble what has been experienced in the past, while
intuition has the power of apprehending the uniqueness and novelty
that always belong to each fresh moment. That there is something
unique and new at every moment, is certainly true; it is also true
that this cannot be fully expressed by means of intellectual concepts.
Only direct acquaintance can give knowledge of what is unique and new.
But direct acquaintance of this kind is given fully in sensation, and
does not require, so far as I can see, any special faculty of
intuition for its apprehension. It is neither intellect nor intuition,
but sensation, that supplies new data; but when the data are new in
any remarkable manner, intellect is much more capable of dealing with
them than intuition would be. The hen with a brood of ducklings no
doubt has intuition which seems to place her inside them, and not
merely to know them analytically; but when the ducklings take to the
water, the whole apparent intuition is seen to be illusory, and the
hen is left helpless on the shore. Intuition, in fact, is an aspect
and development of instinct, and, like all instinct, is admirable in
those customary surroundings which have moulded the habits of the
animal in question, but totally incompetent as soon as the
surroundings are changed in a way which demands some non-habitual mode
of action.

The theoretical understanding of the world, which is the aim of
philosophy, is not a matter of great practical importance to animals,
or to savages, or even to most civilised men. It is hardly to be
supposed, therefore, that the rapid, rough and ready methods of
instinct or intuition will find in this field a favourable ground for
their application. It is the older kinds of activity, which bring out
our kinship with remote generations of animal and semi-human
ancestors, that show intuition at its best. In such matters as
self-preservation and love, intuition will act sometimes (though not
always) with a swiftness and precision which are astonishing to the
critical intellect. But philosophy is not one of the pursuits which
illustrate our affinity with the past: it is a highly refined, highly
civilised pursuit, demanding, for its success, a certain liberation
from the life of instinct, and even, at times, a certain aloofness
from all mundane hopes and fears. It is not in philosophy, therefore,
that we can hope to see intuition at its best. On the contrary, since
the true objects of philosophy, and the habit of thought demanded for
their apprehension, are strange, unusual, and remote, it is here, more
almost than anywhere else, that intellect proves superior to
intuition, and that quick unanalysed convictions are least deserving
of uncritical acceptance.

In advocating the scientific restraint and balance, as against the
self-assertion of a confident reliance upon intuition, we are only
urging, in the sphere of knowledge, that largeness of contemplation,
that impersonal disinterestedness, and that freedom from practical
preoccupations which have been inculcated by all the great religions
of the world. Thus our conclusion, however it may conflict with the
explicit beliefs of many mystics, is, in essence, not contrary to the
spirit which inspires those beliefs, but rather the outcome of this
very spirit as applied in the realm of thought.


II. UNITY AND PLURALITY

One of the most convincing aspects of the mystic illumination is the
apparent revelation of the oneness of all things, giving rise to
pantheism in religion and to monism in philosophy. An elaborate logic,
beginning with Parmenides, and culminating in Hegel and his followers,
has been gradually developed, to prove that the universe is one
indivisible Whole, and that what seem to be its parts, if considered
as substantial and self-existing, are mere illusion. The conception
of a Reality quite other than the world of appearance, a reality one,
indivisible, and unchanging, was introduced into Western philosophy by
Parmenides, not, nominally at least, for mystical or religious
reasons, but on the basis of a logical argument as to the
impossibility of not-being, and most subsequent metaphysical systems
are the outcome of this fundamental idea.

The logic used in defence of mysticism seems to be faulty as logic,
and open to technical criticisms, which I have explained elsewhere. I
shall not here repeat these criticisms, since they are lengthy and
difficult, but shall instead attempt an analysis of the state of mind
from which mystical logic has arisen.

Belief in a reality quite different from what appears to the senses
arises with irresistible force in certain moods, which are the source
of most mysticism, and of most metaphysics. While such a mood is
dominant, the need of logic is not felt, and accordingly the more
thoroughgoing mystics do not employ logic, but appeal directly to the
immediate deliverance of their insight. But such fully developed
mysticism is rare in the West. When the intensity of emotional
conviction subsides, a man who is in the habit of reasoning will
search for logical grounds in favour of the belief which he finds in
himself. But since the belief already exists, he will be very
hospitable to any ground that suggests itself. The paradoxes
apparently proved by his logic are really the paradoxes of mysticism,
and are the goal which he feels his logic must reach if it is to be in
accordance with insight. The resulting logic has rendered most
philosophers incapable of giving any account of the world of science
and daily life. If they had been anxious to give such an account, they
would probably have discovered the errors of their logic; but most of
them were less anxious to understand the world of science and daily
life than to convict it of unreality in the interests of a
super-sensible "real" world.

It is in this way that logic has been pursued by those of the great
philosophers who were mystics. But since they usually took for granted
the supposed insight of the mystic emotion, their logical doctrines
were presented with a certain dryness, and were believed by their
disciples to be quite independent of the sudden illumination from
which they sprang. Nevertheless their origin clung to them, and they
remained--to borrow a useful word from Mr. Santayana--"malicious" in
regard to the world of science and common sense. It is only so that we
can account for the complacency with which philosophers have accepted
the inconsistency of their doctrines with all the common and
scientific facts which seem best established and most worthy of
belief.

The logic of mysticism shows, as is natural, the defects which are
inherent in anything malicious. The impulse to logic, not felt while
the mystic mood is dominant, reasserts itself as the mood fades, but
with a desire to retain the vanishing insight, or at least to prove
that it _was_ insight, and that what seems to contradict it is
illusion. The logic which thus arises is not quite disinterested or
candid, and is inspired by a certain hatred of the daily world to
which it is to be applied. Such an attitude naturally does not tend to
the best results. Everyone knows that to read an author simply in
order to refute him is not the way to understand him; and to read the
book of Nature with a conviction that it is all illusion is just as
unlikely to lead to understanding. If our logic is to find the common
world intelligible, it must not be hostile, but must be inspired by a
genuine acceptance such as is not usually to be found among
metaphysicians.


III. TIME

The unreality of time is a cardinal doctrine of many metaphysical
systems, often nominally based, as already by Parmenides, upon logical
arguments, but originally derived, at any rate in the founders of new
systems, from the certainty which is born in the moment of mystic
insight. As a Persian Sufi poet says:

    "Past and future are what veil God from our sight.
    Burn up both of them with fire! How long
    Wilt thou be partitioned by these segments as a reed?"[5]

The belief that what is ultimately real must be immutable is a very
common one: it gave rise to the metaphysical notion of substance, and
finds, even now, a wholly illegitimate satisfaction in such scientific
doctrines as the conservation of energy and mass.

It is difficult to disentangle the truth and the error in this view.
The arguments for the contention that time is unreal and that the
world of sense is illusory must, I think, be regarded as fallacious.
Nevertheless there is some sense--easier to feel than to state--in
which time is an unimportant and superficial characteristic of
reality. Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real as the
present, and a certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential
to philosophic thought. The importance of time is rather practical
than theoretical, rather in relation to our desires than in relation
to truth. A truer image of the world, I think, is obtained by
picturing things as entering into the stream of time from an eternal
world outside, than from a view which regards time as the devouring
tyrant of all that is. Both in thought and in feeling, even though
time be real, to realise the unimportance of time is the gate of
wisdom.

That this is the case may be seen at once by asking ourselves why our
feelings towards the past are so different from our feelings towards
the future. The reason for this difference is wholly practical: our
wishes can affect the future but not the past, the future is to some
extent subject to our power, while the past is unalterably fixed. But
every future will some day be past: if we see the past truly now, it
must, when it was still future, have been just what we now see it to
be, and what is now future must be just what we shall see it to be
when it has become past. The felt difference of quality between past
and future, therefore, is not an intrinsic difference, but only a
difference in relation to us: to impartial contemplation, it ceases to
exist. And impartiality of contemplation is, in the intellectual
sphere, that very same virtue of disinterestedness which, in the
sphere of action, appears as justice and unselfishness. Whoever wishes
to see the world truly, to rise in thought above the tyranny of
practical desires, must learn to overcome the difference of attitude
towards past and future, and to survey the whole stream of time in one
comprehensive vision.

The kind of way in which, as it seems to me, time ought not to enter
into our theoretic philosophical thought, may be illustrated by the
philosophy which has become associated with the idea of evolution, and
which is exemplified by Nietzsche, pragmatism, and Bergson. This
philosophy, on the basis of the development which has led from the
lowest forms of life up to man, sees in _progress_ the fundamental law
of the universe, and thus admits the difference between _earlier_ and
_later_ into the very citadel of its contemplative outlook. With its
past and future history of the world, conjectural as it is, I do not
wish to quarrel. But I think that, in the intoxication of a quick
success, much that is required for a true understanding of the
universe has been forgotten. Something of Hellenism, something, too,
of Oriental resignation, must be combined with its hurrying Western
self-assertion before it can emerge from the ardour of youth into the
mature wisdom of manhood. In spite of its appeals to science, the true
scientific philosophy, I think, is something more arduous and more
aloof, appealing to less mundane hopes, and requiring a severer
discipline for its successful practice.

Darwin's _Origin of Species_ persuaded the world that the difference
between different species of animals and plants is not the fixed
immutable difference that it appears to be. The doctrine of natural
kinds, which had rendered classification easy and definite, which was
enshrined in the Aristotelian tradition, and protected by its supposed
necessity for orthodox dogma, was suddenly swept away for ever out of
the biological world. The difference between man and the lower
animals, which to our human conceit appears enormous, was shown to be
a gradual achievement, involving intermediate being who could not with
certainty be placed either within or without the human family. The sun
and the planets had already been shown by Laplace to be very probably
derived from a primitive more or less undifferentiated nebula. Thus
the old fixed landmarks became wavering and indistinct, and all sharp
outlines were blurred. Things and species lost their boundaries, and
none could say where they began or where they ended.

But if human conceit was staggered for a moment by its kinship with
the ape, it soon found a way to reassert itself, and that way is the
"philosophy" of evolution. A process which led from the amba to Man
appeared to the philosophers to be obviously a progress--though
whether the amba would agree with this opinion is not known. Hence
the cycle of changes which science had shown to be the probable
history of the past was welcomed as revealing a law of development
towards good in the universe--an evolution or unfolding of an idea
slowly embodying itself in the actual. But such a view, though it
might satisfy Spencer and those whom we may call Hegelian
evolutionists, could not be accepted as adequate by the more
whole-hearted votaries of change. An ideal to which the world
continuously approaches is, to these minds, too dead and static to be
inspiring. Not only the aspiration, but the ideal too, must change and
develop with the course of evolution: there must be no fixed goal, but
a continual fashioning of fresh needs by the impulse which is life and
which alone gives unity to the process.

Life, in this philosophy, is a continuous stream, in which all
divisions are artificial and unreal. Separate things, beginnings and
endings, are mere convenient fictions: there is only smooth unbroken
transition. The beliefs of to-day may count as true to-day, if they
carry us along the stream; but to-morrow they will be false, and must
be replaced by new beliefs to meet the new situation. All our thinking
consists of convenient fictions, imaginary congealings of the stream:
reality flows on in spite of all our fictions, and though it can be
lived, it cannot be conceived in thought. Somehow, without explicit
statement, the assurance is slipped in that the future, though we
cannot foresee it, will be better than the past or the present: the
reader is like the child which expects a sweet because it has been
told to open its mouth and shut its eyes. Logic, mathematics, physics
disappear in this philosophy, because they are too "static"; what is
real is no impulse and movement towards a goal which, like the
rainbow, recedes as we advance, and makes every place different when
it reaches it from what it appeared to be at a distance.

I do not propose to enter upon a technical examination of this
philosophy. I wish only to maintain that the motives and interests
which inspire it are so exclusively practical, and the problems with
which it deals are so special, that it can hardly be regarded as
touching any of the questions that, to my mind, constitute genuine
philosophy.

The predominant interest of evolutionism is in the question of human
destiny, or at least of the destiny of Life. It is more interested in
morality and happiness than in knowledge for its own sake. It must be
admitted that the same may be said of many other philosophies, and
that a desire for the kind of knowledge which philosophy can give is
very rare. But if philosophy is to attain truth, it is necessary first
and foremost that philosophers should acquire the disinterested
intellectual curiosity which characterises the genuine man of science.
Knowledge concerning the future--which is the kind of knowledge that
must be sought if we are to know about human destiny--is possible
within certain narrow limits. It is impossible to say how much the
limits may be enlarged with the progress of science. But what is
evident is that any proposition about the future belongs by its
subject-matter to some particular science, and is to be ascertained,
if at all, by the methods of that science. Philosophy is not a short
cut to the same kind of results as those of the other sciences: if it
is to be a genuine study, it must have a province of its own, and aim
at results which the other sciences can neither prove nor disprove.

Evolutionism, in basing itself upon the notion of _progress_, which is
change from the worse to the better, allows the notion of time, as it
seems to me, to become its tyrant rather than its servant, and thereby
loses that impartiality of contemplation which is the source of all
that is best in philosophic thought and feeling. Metaphysicians, as we
saw, have frequently denied altogether the reality of time. I do not
wish to do this; I wish only to preserve the mental outlook which
inspired the denial, the attitude which, in thought, regards the past
as having the same reality as the present and the same importance as
the future. "In so far," says Spinoza,[6] "as the mind conceives a
thing according to the dictate of reason, it will be equally affected
whether the idea is that of a future, past, or present thing." It is
this "conceiving according to the dictate of reason" that I find
lacking in the philosophy which is based on evolution.


IV. GOOD AND EVIL

Mysticism maintains that all evil is illusory, and sometimes maintains
the same view as regards good, but more often holds that all Reality
is good. Both views are to be found in Heraclitus: "Good and ill are
one," he says, but again, "To God all things are fair and good and
right, but men hold some things wrong and some right." A similar
twofold position is to be found in Spinoza, but he uses the word
"perfection" when he means to speak of the good that is not merely
human. "By reality and perfection I mean the same thing," he says;[7]
but elsewhere we find the definition: "By _good_ I shall mean that
which we certainly know to be useful to us."[8] Thus perfection
belongs to Reality in its own nature, but goodness is relative to
ourselves and our needs, and disappears in an impartial survey. Some
such distinction, I think, is necessary in order to understand the
ethical outlook of mysticism: there is a lower mundane kind of good
and evil, which divides the world of appearance into what seem to be
conflicting parts; but there is also a higher, mystical kind of good,
which belongs to Reality and is not opposed by any correlative kind of
evil.

It is difficult to give a logically tenable account of this position
without recognising that good and evil are subjective, that what is
good is merely that towards which we have one kind of feeling, and
what is evil is merely that towards which we have another kind of
feeling. In our active life, where we have to exercise choice, and to
prefer this to that of two possible acts, it is necessary to have a
distinction of good and evil, or at least of better and worse. But
this distinction, like everything pertaining to action, belongs to
what mysticism regards as the world of illusion, if only because it is
essentially concerned with time. In our contemplative life, where
action is not called for, it is possible to be impartial, and to
overcome the ethical dualism which action requires. So long as we
remain _merely_ impartial, we may be content to say that both the good
and the evil of action are illusions. But if, as we must do if we have
the mystic vision, we find the whole world worthy of love and worship,
if we see

    "The earth, and every common sight....
    Apparell'd in celestial light,"

we shall say that there is a higher good than that of action, and that
this higher good belongs to the whole world as it is in reality. In
this way the twofold attitude and the apparent vacillation of
mysticism are explained and justified.

The possibility of this universal love and joy in all that exists is
of supreme importance for the conduct and happiness of life, and gives
inestimable value to the mystic emotion, apart from any creeds which
may be built upon it. But if we are not to be led into false beliefs,
it is necessary to realise exactly _what_ the mystic emotion reveals.
It reveals a possibility of human nature--a possibility of a nobler,
happier, freer life than any that can be otherwise achieved. But it
does not reveal anything about the non-human, or about the nature of
the universe in general. Good and bad, and even the higher good that
mysticism finds everywhere, are the reflections of our own emotions on
other things, not part of the substance of things as they are in
themselves. And therefore an impartial contemplation, freed from all
pre-occupation with Self, will not judge things good or bad, although
it is very easily combined with that feeling of universal love which
leads the mystic to say that the whole world is good.

The philosophy of evolution, through the notion of progress, is bound
up with the ethical dualism of the worse and the better, and is thus
shut out, not only from the kind of survey which discards good and
evil altogether from its view, but also from the mystical belief in
the goodness of everything. In this way the distinction of good and
evil, like time, becomes a tyrant in this philosophy, and introduces
into thought the restless selectiveness of action. Good and evil, like
time, are, it would seem, not general or fundamental in the world of
thought, but late and highly specialised members of the intellectual
hierarchy.

Although, as we saw, mysticism can be interpreted so as to agree with
the view that good and evil are not intellectually fundamental, it
must be admitted that here we are no longer in verbal agreement with
most of the great philosophers and religious teachers of the past. I
believe, however, that the elimination of ethical considerations from
philosophy is both scientifically necessary and--though this may seem
a paradox--an ethical advance. Both these contentions must be briefly
defended.

The hope of satisfaction to our more human desires--the hope of
demonstrating that the world has this or that desirable ethical
characteristic--is not one which, so far as I can see, a scientific
philosophy can do anything whatever to satisfy. The difference between
a good world and a bad one is a difference in the particular
characteristics of the particular things that exist in these worlds:
it is not a sufficiently abstract difference to come within the
province of philosophy. Love and hate, for example, are ethical
opposites, but to philosophy they are closely analogous attitudes
towards objects. The general form and structure of those attitudes
towards objects which constitute mental phenomena is a problem for
philosophy, but the difference between love and hate is not a
difference of form or structure, and therefore belongs rather to the
special science of psychology than to philosophy. Thus the ethical
interests which have often inspired philosophers must remain in the
background: some kind of ethical interest may inspire the whole study,
but none must obtrude in the detail or be expected in the special
results which are sought.

If this view seems at first sight disappointing, we may remind
ourselves that a similar change has been found necessary in all the
other sciences. The physicist or chemist is not now required to prove
the ethical importance of his ions or atoms; the biologist is not
expected to prove the utility of the plants or animals which he
dissects. In pre-scientific ages this was not the case. Astronomy, for
example, was studied because men believed in astrology: it was thought
that the movements of the planets had the most direct and important
bearing upon the lives of human beings. Presumably, when this belief
decayed and the disinterested study of astronomy began, many who had
found astrology absorbingly interesting decided that astronomy had too
little human interest to be worthy of study. Physics, as it appears in
Plato's Timus for example, is full of ethical notions: it is an
essential part of its purpose to show that the earth is worthy of
admiration. The modern physicist, on the contrary, though he has no
wish to deny that the earth is admirable, is not concerned, as
physicist, with its ethical attributes: he is merely concerned to find
out facts, not to consider whether they are good or bad. In
psychology, the scientific attitude is even more recent and more
difficult than in the physical sciences: it is natural to consider
that human nature is either good or bad, and to suppose that the
difference between good and bad, so all-important in practice, must be
important in theory also. It is only during the last century that an
ethically neutral psychology has grown up; and here too, ethical
neutrality has been essential to scientific success.

In philosophy, hitherto, ethical neutrality has been seldom sought and
hardly ever achieved. Men have remembered their wishes, and have
judged philosophies in relation to their wishes. Driven from the
particular sciences, the belief that the notions of good and evil must
afford a key to the understanding of the world has sought a refuge in
philosophy. But even from this last refuge, if philosophy is not to
remain a set of pleasing dreams, this belief must be driven forth. It
is a commonplace that happiness is not best achieved by those who
seek it directly; and it would seem that the same is true of the good.
In thought, at any rate, those who forget good and evil and seek only
to know the facts are more likely to achieve good than those who view
the world through the distorting medium of their own desires.

We are thus brought back to our seeming paradox, that a philosophy
which does not seek to impose upon the world its own conceptions of
good and evil is not only more likely to achieve truth, but is also
the outcome of a higher ethical standpoint than one which, like
evolutionism and most traditional systems, is perpetually appraising
the universe and seeking to find in it an embodiment of present
ideals. In religion, and in every deeply serious view of the world and
of human destiny, there is an element of submission, a realisation of
the limits of human power, which is somewhat lacking in the modern
world, with its quick material successes and its insolent belief in
the boundless possibilities of progress. "He that loveth his life
shall lose it"; and there is danger lest, through a too confident love
of life, life itself should lose much of what gives it its highest
worth. The submission which religion inculcates in action is
essentially the same in spirit as that which science teaches in
thought; and the ethical neutrality by which its victories have been
achieved is the outcome of that submission.

The good which it concerns us to remember is the good which it lies in
our power to create--the good in our own lives and in our attitude
towards the world. Insistence on belief in an external realisation of
the good is a form of self-assertion, which, while it cannot secure
the external good which it desires, can seriously impair the inward
good which lies within our power, and destroy that reverence towards
fact which constitutes both what is valuable in humility and what is
fruitful in the scientific temper.

Human beings cannot, of course, wholly transcend human nature;
something subjective, if only the interest that determines the
direction of our attention, must remain in all our thought. But
scientific philosophy comes nearer to objectivity than any other human
pursuit, and gives us, therefore, the closest constant and the most
intimate relation with the outer world that it is possible to achieve.
To the primitive mind, everything is either friendly or hostile; but
experience has shown that friendliness and hostility are not the
conceptions by which the world is to be understood. Scientific
philosophy thus represents, though as yet only in a nascent condition,
a higher form of thought than any pre-scientific belief or
imagination, and, like every approach to self-transcendence, it brings
with it a rich reward in increase of scope and breadth and
comprehension. Evolutionism, in spite of its appeals to particular
scientific facts, fails to be a truly scientific philosophy because of
its slavery to time, its ethical preoccupations, and its predominant
interest in our mundane concerns and destiny. A truly scientific
philosophy will be more humble, more piecemeal, more arduous, offering
less glitter of outward mirage to flatter fallacious hopes, but more
indifferent to fate, and more capable of accepting the world without
the tyrannous imposition of our human and temporary demands.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] All the above quotations are from Burnet's _Early Greek
Philosophy_, (2nd ed., 1908), pp. 146-156.

[2] _Republic_, 514, translated by Davies and Vaughan.

[3] This section, and also one or two pages in later sections, have
been printed in a course of Lowell lectures _On our knowledge of the
external world_, published by the Open Court Publishing Company. But I
have left them here, as this is the context for which they were
originally written.

[4] _Introduction to Metaphysics_, p. 1.

[5] Whinfield's translation of the _Masnavi_ (Trbner, 1887), p. 34.

[6] _Ethics_, Bk. IV, Prop. LXII.

[7] Ib., Pt. IV, Df. I.

[8] _Ethics_. Pt. II. Df. VI.




II

THE PLACE OF SCIENCE IN A LIBERAL EDUCATION


I

Science, to the ordinary reader of newspapers, is represented by a
varying selection of sensational triumphs, such as wireless telegraphy
and aeroplanes, radio-activity and the marvels of modern alchemy. It is
not of this aspect of science that I wish to speak. Science, in this
aspect, consists of detached up-to-date fragments, interesting only
until they are replaced by something newer and more up-to-date,
displaying nothing of the systems of patiently constructed knowledge
out of which, almost as a casual incident, have come the practically
useful results which interest the man in the street. The increased
command over the forces of nature which is derived from science is
undoubtedly an amply sufficient reason for encouraging scientific
research, but this reason has been so often urged and is so easily
appreciated that other reasons, to my mind quite as important, are apt
to be overlooked. It is with these other reasons, especially with the
intrinsic value of a scientific habit of mind in forming our outlook
on the world, that I shall be concerned in what follows.

The instance of wireless telegraphy will serve to illustrate the
difference between the two points of view. Almost all the serious
intellectual labour required for the possibility of this invention is
due to three men--Faraday, Maxwell, and Hertz. In alternating layers
of experiment and theory these three men built up the modern theory of
electromagnetism, and demonstrated the identity of light with
electromagnetic waves. The system which they discovered is one of
profound intellectual interest, bringing together and unifying an
endless variety of apparently detached phenomena, and displaying a
cumulative mental power which cannot but afford delight to every
generous spirit. The mechanical details which remained to be adjusted
in order to utilise their discoveries for a practical system of
telegraphy demanded, no doubt, very considerable ingenuity, but had
not that broad sweep and that universality which could give them
intrinsic interest as an object of disinterested contemplation.

From the point of view of training the mind, of giving that
well-informed, impersonal outlook which constitutes culture in the
good sense of this much-misused word, it seems to be generally held
indisputable that a literary education is superior to one based on
science. Even the warmest advocates of science are apt to rest their
claims on the contention that culture ought to be sacrificed to
utility. Those men of science who respect culture, when they associate
with men learned in the classics, are apt to admit, not merely
politely, but sincerely, a certain inferiority on their side,
compensated doubtless by the services which science renders to
humanity, but none the less real. And so long as this attitude exists
among men of science, it tends to verify itself: the intrinsically
valuable aspects of science tend to be sacrificed to the merely
useful, and little attempt is made to preserve that leisurely,
systematic survey by which the finer quality of mind is formed and
nourished.

But even if there be, in present fact, any such inferiority as is
supposed in the educational value of science, this is, I believe, not
the fault of science itself, but the fault of the spirit in which
science is taught. If its full possibilities were realised by those
who teach it, I believe that its capacity of producing those habits of
mind which constitute the highest mental excellence would be at least
as great as that of literature, and more particularly of Greek and
Latin literature. In saying this I have no wish whatever to disparage
a classical education. I have not myself enjoyed its benefits, and my
knowledge of Greek and Latin authors is derived almost wholly from
translations. But I am firmly persuaded that the Greeks fully deserve
all the admiration that is bestowed upon them, and that it is a very
great and serious loss to be unacquainted with their writings. It is
not by attacking them, but by drawing attention to neglected
excellences in science, that I wish to conduct my argument.

One defect, however, does seem inherent in a purely classical
education--namely, a too exclusive emphasis on the past. By the study
of what is absolutely ended and can never be renewed, a habit of
criticism towards the present and the future is engendered. The
qualities in which the present excels are qualities to which the study
of the past does not direct attention, and to which, therefore, the
student of Greek civilisation may easily become blind. In what is new
and growing there is apt to be something crude, insolent, even a
little vulgar, which is shocking to the man of sensitive taste;
quivering from the rough contact, he retires to the trim gardens of a
polished past, forgetting that they were reclaimed from the wilderness
by men as rough and earth-soiled as those from whom he shrinks in his
own day. The habit of being unable to recognise merit until it is
dead is too apt to be the result of a purely bookish life, and a
culture based wholly on the past will seldom be able to pierce through
everyday surroundings to the essential splendour of contemporary
things, or to the hope of still greater splendour in the future.

    "My eyes saw not the men of old;
    And now their age away has rolled.
    I weep--to think I shall not see
    The heroes of posterity."

So says the Chinese poet; but such impartiality is rare in the more
pugnacious atmosphere of the West, where the champions of past and
future fight a never-ending battle, instead of combining to seek out
the merits of both.

This consideration, which militates not only against the exclusive
study of the classics, but against every form of culture which has
become static, traditional, and academic, leads inevitably to the
fundamental question: What is the true end of education? But before
attempting to answer this question it will be well to define the sense
in which we are to use the word "education." For this purpose I shall
distinguish the sense in which I mean to use it from two others, both
perfectly legitimate, the one broader and the other narrower than the
sense in which I mean to use the word.

In the broader sense, education will include not only what we learn
through instruction, but all that we learn through personal
experience--the formation of character through the education of life.
Of this aspect of education, vitally important as it is, I will say
nothing, since its consideration would introduce topics quite foreign
to the question with which we are concerned.

In the narrower sense, education may be confined to instruction, the
imparting of definite information on various subjects, because such
information, in and for itself, is useful in daily life. Elementary
education--reading, writing, and arithmetic--is almost wholly of this
kind. But instruction, necessary as it is, does not _per se_
constitute education in the sense in which I wish to consider it.

Education, in the sense in which I mean it, may be defined as _the
formation, by means of instruction, of certain mental habits and a
certain outlook on life and the world_. It remains to ask ourselves,
what mental habits, and what sort of outlook, can be hoped for as the
result of instruction? When we have answered this question we can
attempt to decide what science has to contribute to the formation of
the habits and outlook which we desire.

Our whole life is built about a certain number--not a very small
number--of primary instincts and impulses. Only what is in some way
connected with these instincts and impulses appears to us desirable or
important; there is no faculty, whether "reason" or "virtue" or
whatever it may be called, that can take our active life and our hopes
and fears outside the region controlled by these first movers of all
desire. Each of them is like a queen-bee, aided by a hive of workers
gathering honey; but when the queen is gone the workers languish and
die, and the cells remain empty of their expected sweetness. So with
each primary impulse in civilised man: it is surrounded and protected
by a busy swarm of attendant derivative desires, which store up in its
service whatever honey the surrounding world affords. But if the
queen-impulse dies, the death-dealing influence, though retarded a
little by habit, spreads slowly through all the subsidiary impulses,
and a whole tract of life becomes inexplicably colourless. What was
formerly full of zest, and so obviously worth doing that it raised no
questions, has now grown dreary and purposeless: with a sense of
disillusion we inquire the meaning of life, and decide, perhaps, that
all is vanity. The search for an outside meaning that can _compel_ an
inner response must always be disappointed: all "meaning" must be at
bottom related to our primary desires, and when they are extinct no
miracle can restore to the world the value which they reflected upon
it.

The purpose of education, therefore, cannot be to create any primary
impulse which is lacking in the uneducated; the purpose can only be to
enlarge the scope of those that human nature provides, by increasing
the number and variety of attendant thoughts, and by showing where the
most permanent satisfaction is to be found. Under the impulse of a
Calvinistic horror of the "natural man," this obvious truth has been
too often misconceived in the training of the young; "nature" has been
falsely regarded as excluding all that is best in what is natural, and
the endeavour to teach virtue has led to the production of stunted and
contorted hypocrites instead of full-grown human beings. From such
mistakes in education a better psychology or a kinder heart is
beginning to preserve the present generation; we need, therefore,
waste no more words on the theory that the purpose of education is to
thwart or eradicate nature.

But although nature must supply the initial force of desire, nature is
not, in the civilised man, the spasmodic, fragmentary, and yet violent
set of impulses that it is in the savage. Each impulse has its
constitutional ministry of thought and knowledge and reflection,
through which possible conflicts of impulses are foreseen, and
temporary impulses are controlled by the unifying impulse which may be
called wisdom. In this way education destroys the crudity of
instinct, and increases through knowledge the wealth and variety of
the individual's contacts with the outside world, making him no longer
an isolated fighting unit, but a citizen of the universe, embracing
distant countries, remote regions of space, and vast stretches of past
and future within the circle of his interests. It is this simultaneous
softening in the insistence of desire and enlargement of its scope
that is the chief moral end of education.

Closely connected with this moral end is the more purely intellectual
aim of education, the endeavour to make us see and imagine the world
in an objective manner, as far as possible as it is in itself, and not
merely through the distorting medium of personal desire. The complete
attainment of such an objective view is no doubt an ideal,
indefinitely approachable, but not actually and fully realisable.
Education, considered as a process of forming our mental habits and
our outlook on the world, is to be judged successful in proportion as
its outcome approximates to this ideal; in proportion, that is to say,
as it gives us a true view of our place in society, of the relation of
the whole human society to its non-human environment, and of the
nature of the non-human world as it is in itself apart from our
desires and interests. If this standard is admitted, we can return to
the consideration of science, inquiring how far science contributes to
such an aim, and whether it is in any respect superior to its rivals
in educational practice.


II

Two opposite and at first sight conflicting merits belong to science
as against literature and art. The one, which is not inherently
necessary, but is certainly true at the present day, is hopefulness
as to the future of human achievement, and in particular as to the
useful work that may be accomplished by any intelligent student. This
merit and the cheerful outlook which it engenders prevent what might
otherwise be the depressing effect of another aspect of science, to my
mind also a merit, and perhaps its greatest merit--I mean the
irrelevance of human passions and of the whole subjective apparatus
where scientific truth is concerned. Each of these reasons for
preferring the study of science requires some amplification. Let us
begin with the first.

In the study of literature or art our attention is perpetually riveted
upon the past: the men of Greece or of the Renaissance did better than
any men do now; the triumphs of former ages, so far from facilitating
fresh triumphs in our own age, actually increase the difficulty of
fresh triumphs by rendering originality harder of attainment; not only
is artistic achievement not cumulative, but it seems even to depend
upon a certain freshness and _navet_ of impulse and vision which
civilisation tends to destroy. Hence comes, to those who have been
nourished on the literary and artistic productions of former ages, a
certain peevishness and undue fastidiousness towards the present, from
which there seems no escape except into the deliberate vandalism which
ignores tradition and in the search after originality achieves only
the eccentric. But in such vandalism there is none of the simplicity
and spontaneity out of which great art springs: theory is still the
canker in its core, and insincerity destroys the advantages of a
merely pretended ignorance.

The despair thus arising from an education which suggests no
pre-eminent mental activity except that of artistic creation is wholly
absent from an education which gives the knowledge of scientific
method. The discovery of scientific method, except in pure
mathematics, is a thing of yesterday; speaking broadly, we may say
that it dates from Galileo. Yet already it has transformed the world,
and its success proceeds with ever-accelerating velocity. In science
men have discovered an activity of the very highest value in which
they are no longer, as in art, dependent for progress upon the
appearance of continually greater genius, for in science the
successors stand upon the shoulders of their predecessors; where one
man of supreme genius has invented a method, a thousand lesser men can
apply it. No transcendent ability is required in order to make useful
discoveries in science; the edifice of science needs its masons,
bricklayers, and common labourers as well as its foremen,
master-builders, and architects. In art nothing worth doing can be
done without genius; in science even a very moderate capacity can
contribute to a supreme achievement.

In science the man of real genius is the man who invents a new method.
The notable discoveries are often made by his successors, who can
apply the method with fresh vigour, unimpaired by the previous labour
of perfecting it; but the mental calibre of the thought required for
their work, however brilliant, is not so great as that required by the
first inventor of the method. There are in science immense numbers of
different methods, appropriate to different classes of problems; but
over and above them all, there is something not easily definable,
which may be called _the_ method of science. It was formerly customary
to identify this with the inductive method, and to associate it with
the name of Bacon. But the true inductive method was not discovered by
Bacon, and the true method of science is something which includes
deduction as much as induction, logic and mathematics as much as
botany and geology. I shall not attempt the difficult task of stating
what the scientific method is, but I will try to indicate the temper
of mind out of which the scientific method grows, which is the second
of the two merits that were mentioned above as belonging to a
scientific education.

The kernel of the scientific outlook is a thing so simple, so obvious,
so seemingly trivial, that the mention of it may almost excite
derision. The kernel of the scientific outlook is the refusal to
regard our own desires, tastes, and interests as affording a key to
the understanding of the world. Stated thus baldly, this may seem no
more than a trite truism. But to remember it consistently in matters
arousing our passionate partisanship is by no means easy, especially
where the available evidence is uncertain and inconclusive. A few
illustrations will make this clear.

Aristotle, I understand, considered that the stars must move in
circles because the circle is the most perfect curve. In the absence
of evidence to the contrary, he allowed himself to decide a question
of fact by an appeal to sthetico-moral considerations. In such a case
it is at once obvious to us that this appeal was unjustifiable. We
know now how to ascertain as a fact the way in which the heavenly
bodies move, and we know that they do not move in circles, or even in
accurate ellipses, or in any other kind of simply describable curve.
This may be painful to a certain hankering after simplicity of pattern
in the universe, but we know that in astronomy such feelings are
irrelevant. Easy as this knowledge seems now, we owe it to the courage
and insight of the first inventors of scientific method, and more
especially of Galileo.

We may take as another illustration Malthus's doctrine of population.
This illustration is all the better for the fact that his actual
doctrine is now known to be largely erroneous. It is not his
conclusions that are valuable, but the temper and method of his
inquiry. As everyone knows, it was to him that Darwin owed an
essential part of his theory of natural selection, and this was only
possible because Malthus's outlook was truly scientific. His great
merit lies in considering man not as the object of praise or blame,
but as a part of nature, a thing with a certain characteristic
behaviour from which certain consequences must follow. If the
behaviour is not quite what Malthus supposed, if the consequences are
not quite what he inferred, that may falsify his conclusions, but does
not impair the value of his method. The objections which were made
when his doctrine was new--that it was horrible and depressing, that
people ought not to act as he said they did, and so on--were all such
as implied an unscientific attitude of mind; as against all of them,
his calm determination to treat man as a natural phenomenon marks an
important advance over the reformers of the eighteenth century and the
Revolution.

Under the influence of Darwinism the scientific attitude towards man
has now become fairly common, and is to some people quite natural,
though to most it is still a difficult and artificial intellectual
contortion. There is however, one study which is as yet almost wholly
untouched by the scientific spirit--I mean the study of philosophy.
Philosophers and the public imagine that the scientific spirit must
pervade pages that bristle with allusions to ions, germ-plasms, and
the eyes of shell-fish. But as the devil can quote Scripture, so the
philosopher can quote science. The scientific spirit is not an affair
of quotation, of externally acquired information, any more than
manners are an affair of the etiquette-book. The scientific attitude
of mind involves a sweeping away of all other desires in the interests
of the desire to know--it involves suppression of hopes and fears,
loves and hates, and the whole subjective emotional life, until we
become subdued to the material, able to see it frankly, without
preconceptions, without bias, without any wish except to see it as it
is, and without any belief that what it is must be determined by some
relation, positive or negative, to what we should like it to be, or to
what we can easily imagine it to be.

Now in philosophy this attitude of mind has not as yet been achieved.
A certain self-absorption, not personal, but human, has marked almost
all attempts to conceive the universe as a whole. Mind, or some aspect
of it--thought or will or sentience--has been regarded as the pattern
after which the universe is to be conceived, for no better reason, at
bottom, than that such a universe would not seem strange, and would
give us the cosy feeling that every place is like home. To conceive
the universe as essentially progressive or essentially deteriorating,
for example, is to give to our hopes and fears a cosmic importance
which _may_, of course, be justified, but which we have as yet no
reason to suppose justified. Until we have learnt to think of it in
ethically neutral terms, we have not arrived at a scientific attitude
in philosophy; and until we have arrived at such an attitude, it is
hardly to be hoped that philosophy will achieve any solid results.

I have spoken so far largely of the negative aspect of the scientific
spirit, but it is from the positive aspect that its value is derived.
The instinct of constructiveness, which is one of the chief incentives
to artistic creation, can find in scientific systems a satisfaction
more massive than any epic poem. Disinterested curiosity, which is the
source of almost all intellectual effort, finds with astonished
delight that science can unveil secrets which might well have seemed
for ever undiscoverable. The desire for a larger life and wider
interests, for an escape from private circumstances, and even from the
whole recurring human cycle of birth and death, is fulfilled by the
impersonal cosmic outlook of science as by nothing else. To all these
must be added, as contributing to the happiness of the man of science,
the admiration of splendid achievement, and the consciousness of
inestimable utility to the human race. A life devoted to science is
therefore a happy life, and its happiness is derived from the very
best sources that are open to dwellers on this troubled and passionate
planet.




III

A FREE MAN'S WORSHIP[9]


To Dr. Faustus in his study Mephistopheles told the history of the
Creation, saying:

"The endless praises of the choirs of angels had begun to grow
wearisome; for, after all, did he not deserve their praise? Had he not
given them endless joy? Would it not be more amusing to obtain
undeserved praise, to be worshipped by beings whom he tortured? He
smiled inwardly, and resolved that the great drama should be
performed.

"For countless ages the hot nebula whirled aimlessly through space. At
length it began to take shape, the central mass threw off planets, the
planets cooled, boiling seas and burning mountains heaved and tossed,
from black masses of cloud hot sheets of rain deluged the barely solid
crust. And now the first germ of life grew in the depths of the ocean,
and developed rapidly in the fructifying warmth into vast forest
trees, huge ferns springing from the damp mould, sea monsters
breeding, fighting, devouring, and passing away. And from the
monsters, as the play unfolded itself, Man was born, with the power of
thought, the knowledge of good and evil, and the cruel thirst for
worship. And Man saw that all is passing in this mad, monstrous world,
that all is struggling to snatch, at any cost, a few brief moments of
life before Death's inexorable decree. And Man said: 'There is a
hidden purpose, could we but fathom it, and the purpose is good; for
we must reverence something, and in the visible world there is nothing
worthy of reverence.' And Man stood aside from the struggle, resolving
that God intended harmony to come out of chaos by human efforts. And
when he followed the instincts which God had transmitted to him from
his ancestry of beasts of prey, he called it Sin, and asked God to
forgive him. But he doubted whether he could be justly forgiven, until
he invented a divine Plan by which God's wrath was to have been
appeased. And seeing the present was bad, he made it yet worse, that
thereby the future might be better. And he gave God thanks for the
strength that enabled him to forgo even the joys that were possible.
And God smiled; and when he saw that Man had become perfect in
renunciation and worship, he sent another sun through the sky, which
crashed into Man's sun; and all returned again to nebula.

"'Yes,' he murmured, 'it was a good play; I will have it performed
again.'"

Such, in outline, but even more purposeless, more void of meaning, is
the world which Science presents for our belief. Amid such a world, if
anywhere, our ideals henceforward must find a home. That Man is the
product of causes which had no prevision of the end they were
achieving; that his origin, his growth, his hopes and fears, his loves
and his beliefs, are but the outcome of accidental collocations of
atoms; that no fire, no heroism, no intensity of thought and feeling,
can preserve an individual life beyond the grave; that all the labours
of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday
brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in the vast
death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of Man's
achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the dbris of a universe
in ruins--all these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so
nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to
stand. Only within the scaffolding of these truths, only on the firm
foundation of unyielding despair, can the soul's habitation henceforth
be safely built.

How, in such an alien and inhuman world, can so powerless a creature
as Man preserve his aspirations untarnished? A strange mystery it is
that Nature, omnipotent but blind, in the revolutions of her secular
hurryings through the abysses of space, has brought forth at last a
child, subject still to her power, but gifted with sight, with
knowledge of good and evil, with the capacity of judging all the works
of his unthinking Mother. In spite of Death, the mark and seal of the
parental control, Man is yet free, during his brief years, to examine,
to criticise, to know, and in imagination to create. To him alone, in
the world with which he is acquainted, this freedom belongs; and in
this lies his superiority to the resistless forces that control his
outward life.

The savage, like ourselves, feels the oppression of his impotence
before the powers of Nature; but having in himself nothing that he
respects more than Power, he is willing to prostrate himself before
his gods, without inquiring whether they are worthy of his worship.
Pathetic and very terrible is the long history of cruelty and torture,
of degradation and human sacrifice, endured in the hope of placating
the jealous gods: surely, the trembling believer thinks, when what is
most precious has been freely given, their lust for blood must be
appeased, and more will not be required. The religion of Moloch--as
such creeds may be generically called--is in essence the cringing
submission of the slave, who dare not, even in his heart, allow the
thought that his master deserves no adulation. Since the independence
of ideals is not yet acknowledged, Power may be freely worshipped, and
receive an unlimited respect, despite its wanton infliction of pain.

But gradually, as morality grows bolder, the claim of the ideal world
begins to be felt; and worship, if it is not to cease, must be given
to gods of another kind than those created by the savage. Some, though
they feel the demands of the ideal, will still consciously reject
them, still urging that naked Power is worthy of worship. Such is the
attitude inculcated in God's answer to Job out of the whirlwind: the
divine power and knowledge are paraded, but of the divine goodness
there is no hint. Such also is the attitude of those who, in our own
day, base their morality upon the struggle for survival, maintaining
that the survivors are necessarily the fittest. But others, not
content with an answer so repugnant to the moral sense, will adopt the
position which we have become accustomed to regard as specially
religious, maintaining that, in some hidden manner, the world of fact
is really harmonious with the world of ideals. Thus Man creates God,
all-powerful and all-good, the mystic unity of what is and what should
be.

But the world of fact, after all, is not good; and, in submitting our
judgment to it, there is an element of slavishness from which our
thoughts must be purged. For in all things it is well to exalt the
dignity of Man, by freeing him as far as possible from the tyranny of
non-human Power. When we have realised that Power is largely bad, that
man, with his knowledge of good and evil, is but a helpless atom in a
world which has no such knowledge, the choice is again presented to
us: Shall we worship Force, or shall we worship Goodness? Shall our
God exist and be evil, or shall he be recognised as the creation of
our own conscience?

The answer to this question is very momentous, and affects profoundly
our whole morality. The worship of Force, to which Carlyle and
Nietzsche and the creed of Militarism have accustomed us, is the
result of failure to maintain our own ideals against a hostile
universe: it is itself a prostrate submission to evil, a sacrifice of
our best to Moloch. If strength indeed is to be respected, let us
respect rather the strength of those who refuse that false
"recognition of facts" which fails to recognise that facts are often
bad. Let us admit that, in the world we know, there are many things
that would be better otherwise, and that the ideals to which we do and
must adhere are not realised in the realm of matter. Let us preserve
our respect for truth, for beauty, for the ideal of perfection which
life does not permit us to attain, though none of these things meet
with the approval of the unconscious universe. If Power is bad, as it
seems to be, let us reject it from our hearts. In this lies Man's true
freedom: in determination to worship only the God created by our own
love of the good, to respect only the heaven which inspires the
insight of our best moments. In action, in desire, we must submit
perpetually to the tyranny of outside forces; but in thought, in
aspiration, we are free, free from our fellow-men, free from the petty
planet on which our bodies impotently crawl, free even, while we live,
from the tyranny of death. Let us learn, then, that energy of faith
which enables us to live constantly in the vision of the good; and let
us descend, in action, into the world of fact, with that vision always
before us.

When first the opposition of fact and ideal grows fully visible, a
spirit of fiery revolt, of fierce hatred of the gods, seems necessary
to the assertion of freedom. To defy with Promethean constancy a
hostile universe, to keep its evil always in view, always actively
hated, to refuse no pain that the malice of Power can invent, appears
to be the duty of all who will not bow before the inevitable. But
indignation is still a bondage, for it compels our thoughts to be
occupied with an evil world; and in the fierceness of desire from
which rebellion springs there is a kind of self-assertion which it is
necessary for the wise to overcome. Indignation is a submission of our
thoughts, but not of our desires; the Stoic freedom in which wisdom
consists is found in the submission of our desires, but not of our
thoughts. From the submission of our desires springs the virtue of
resignation; from the freedom of our thoughts springs the whole world
of art and philosophy, and the vision of beauty by which, at last, we
half reconquer the reluctant world. But the vision of beauty is
possible only to unfettered contemplation, to thoughts not weighted by
the load of eager wishes; and thus Freedom comes only to those who no
longer ask of life that it shall yield them any of those personal
goods that are subject to the mutations of Time.

Although the necessity of renunciation is evidence of the existence of
evil, yet Christianity, in preaching it, has shown a wisdom exceeding
that of the Promethean philosophy of rebellion. It must be admitted
that, of the things we desire, some, though they prove impossible, are
yet real goods; others, however, as ardently longed for, do not form
part of a fully purified ideal. The belief that what must be renounced
is bad, though sometimes false, is far less often false than untamed
passion supposes; and the creed of religion, by providing a reason
for proving that it is never false, has been the means of purifying
our hopes by the discovery of many austere truths.

But there is in resignation a further good element: even real goods,
when they are unattainable, ought not to be fretfully desired. To
every man comes, sooner or later, the great renunciation. For the
young, there is nothing unattainable; a good thing desired with the
whole force of a passionate will, and yet impossible, is to them not
credible. Yet, by death, by illness, by poverty, or by the voice of
duty, we must learn, each one of us, that the world was not made for
us, and that, however beautiful may be the things we crave, Fate may
nevertheless forbid them. It is the part of courage, when misfortune
comes, to bear without repining the ruin of our hopes, to turn away
our thoughts from vain regrets. This degree of submission to Power is
not only just and right: it is the very gate of wisdom.

But passive renunciation is not the whole of wisdom; for not by
renunciation alone can we build a temple for the worship of our own
ideals. Haunting foreshadowings of the temple appear in the realm of
imagination, in music, in architecture, in the untroubled kingdom of
reason, and in the golden sunset magic of lyrics, where beauty shines
and glows, remote from the touch of sorrow, remote from the fear of
change, remote from the failures and disenchantments of the world of
fact. In the contemplation of these things the vision of heaven will
shape itself in our hearts, giving at once a touchstone to judge the
world about us, and an inspiration by which to fashion to our needs
whatever is not incapable of serving as a stone in the sacred temple.

Except for those rare spirits that are born without sin, there is a
cavern of darkness to be traversed before that temple can be entered.
The gate of the cavern is despair, and its floor is paved with the
gravestones of abandoned hopes. There Self must die; there the
eagerness, the greed of untamed desire must be slain, for only so can
the soul be freed from the empire of Fate. But out of the cavern the
Gate of Renunciation leads again to the daylight of wisdom, by whose
radiance a new insight, a new joy, a new tenderness, shine forth to
gladden the pilgrim's heart.

When, without the bitterness of impotent rebellion, we have learnt
both to resign ourselves to the outward rule of Fate and to recognise
that the non-human world is unworthy of our worship, it becomes
possible at last so to transform and refashion the unconscious
universe, so to transmute it in the crucible of imagination, that a
new image of shining gold replaces the old idol of clay. In all the
multiform facts of the world--in the visual shapes of trees and
mountains and clouds, in the events of the life of man, even in the
very omnipotence of Death--the insight of creative idealism can find
the reflection of a beauty which its own thoughts first made. In this
way mind asserts its subtle mastery over the thoughtless forces of
Nature. The more evil the material with which it deals, the more
thwarting to untrained desire, the greater is its achievement in
inducing the reluctant rock to yield up its hidden treasures, the
prouder its victory in compelling the opposing forces to swell the
pageant of its triumph. Of all the arts, Tragedy is the proudest, the
most triumphant; for it builds its shining citadel in the very centre
of the enemy's country, on the very summit of his highest mountain;
from its impregnable watchtowers, his camps and arsenals, his columns
and forts, are all revealed; within its walls the free life continues,
while the legions of Death and Pain and Despair, and all the servile
captains of tyrant Fate, afford the burghers of that dauntless city
new spectacles of beauty. Happy those sacred ramparts, thrice happy
the dwellers on that all-seeing eminence. Honour to those brave
warriors who, through countless ages of warfare, have preserved for us
the priceless heritage of liberty, and have kept undefiled by
sacrilegious invaders the home of the unsubdued.

But the beauty of Tragedy does but make visible a quality which, in
more or less obvious shapes, is present always and everywhere in life.
In the spectacle of Death, in the endurance of intolerable pain, and
in the irrevocableness of a vanished past, there is a sacredness, an
overpowering awe, a feeling of the vastness, the depth, the
inexhaustible mystery of existence, in which, as by some strange
marriage of pain, the sufferer is bound to the world by bonds of
sorrow. In these moments of insight, we lose all eagerness of
temporary desire, all struggling and striving for petty ends, all care
for the little trivial things that, to a superficial view, make up the
common life of day by day; we see, surrounding the narrow raft
illumined by the flickering light of human comradeship, the dark ocean
on whose rolling waves we toss for a brief hour; from the great night
without, a chill blast breaks in upon our refuge; all the loneliness
of humanity amid hostile forces is concentrated upon the individual
soul, which must struggle alone, with what of courage it can command,
against the whole weight of a universe that cares nothing for its
hopes and fears. Victory, in this struggle with the powers of
darkness, is the true baptism into the glorious company of heroes, the
true initiation into the overmastering beauty of human existence. From
that awful encounter of the soul with the outer world, renunciation,
wisdom, and charity are born; and with their birth a new life begins.
To take into the inmost shrine of the soul the irresistible forces
whose puppets we seem to be--Death and change, the irrevocableness of
the past, and the powerlessness of man before the blind hurry of the
universe from vanity to vanity--to feel these things and know them is
to conquer them.

This is the reason why the Past has such magical power. The beauty of
its motionless and silent pictures is like the enchanted purity of
late autumn, when the leaves, though one breath would make them fall,
still glow against the sky in golden glory. The Past does not change
or strive; like Duncan, after life's fitful fever it sleeps well; what
was eager and grasping, what was petty and transitory, has faded away,
the things that were beautiful and eternal shine out of it like stars
in the night. Its beauty, to a soul not worthy of it, is unendurable;
but to a soul which has conquered Fate it is the key of religion.

The life of Man, viewed outwardly, is but a small thing in comparison
with the forces of Nature. The slave is doomed to worship Time and
Fate and Death, because they are greater than anything he finds in
himself, and because all his thoughts are of things which they devour.
But, great as they are, to think of them greatly, to feel their
passionless splendour, is greater still. And such thought makes us
free men; we no longer bow before the inevitable in Oriental
subjection, but we absorb it, and make it a part of ourselves. To
abandon the struggle for private happiness, to expel all eagerness of
temporary desire, to burn with passion for eternal things--this is
emancipation, and this is the free man's worship. And this liberation
is effected by a contemplation of Fate; for Fate itself is subdued by
the mind which leaves nothing to be purged by the purifying fire of
Time.

United with his fellow-men by the strongest of all ties, the tie of a
common doom, the free man finds that a new vision is with him always,
shedding over every daily task the light of love. The life of Man is a
long march through the night, surrounded by invisible foes, tortured
by weariness and pain, towards a goal that few can hope to reach, and
where none may tarry long. One by one, as they march, our comrades
vanish from our sight, seized by the silent orders of omnipotent
Death. Very brief is the time in which we can help them, in which
their happiness or misery is decided. Be it ours to shed sunshine on
their path, to lighten their sorrows by the balm of sympathy, to give
them the pure joy of a never-tiring affection, to strengthen failing
courage, to instil faith in hours of despair. Let us not weigh in
grudging scales their merits and demerits, but let us think only of
their need--of the sorrows, the difficulties, perhaps the blindnesses,
that make the misery of their lives; let us remember that they are
fellow-sufferers in the same darkness, actors in the same tragedy with
ourselves. And so, when their day is over, when their good and their
evil have become eternal by the immortality of the past, be it ours to
feel that, where they suffered, where they failed, no deed of ours was
the cause; but wherever a spark of the divine fire kindled in their
hearts, we were ready with encouragement, with sympathy, with brave
words in which high courage glowed.

Brief and powerless is Man's life; on him and all his race the slow,
sure doom falls pitiless and dark. Blind to good and evil, reckless of
destruction, omnipotent matter rolls on its relentless way; for Man,
condemned to-day to lose his dearest, to-morrow himself to pass
through the gate of darkness, it remains only to cherish, ere yet the
blow falls, the lofty thoughts that ennoble his little day; disdaining
the coward terrors of the slave of Fate, to worship at the shrine that
his own hands have built; undismayed by the empire of chance, to
preserve a mind free from the wanton tyranny that rules his outward
life; proudly defiant of the irresistible forces that tolerate, for a
moment, his knowledge and his condemnation, to sustain alone, a weary
but unyielding Atlas, the world that his own ideals have fashioned
despite the trampling march of unconscious power.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Reprinted from the _Independent Review_, December, 1903.




IV

THE STUDY OF MATHEMATICS


In regard to every form of human activity it is necessary that the
question should be asked from time to time, What is its purpose and
ideal? In what way does it contribute to the beauty of human
existence? As respects those pursuits which contribute only remotely,
by providing the mechanism of life, it is well to be reminded that not
the mere fact of living is to be desired, but the art of living in the
contemplation of great things. Still more in regard to those
avocations which have no end outside themselves, which are to be
justified, if at all, as actually adding to the sum of the world's
permanent possessions, it is necessary to keep alive a knowledge of
their aims, a clear prefiguring vision of the temple in which creative
imagination is to be embodied.

The fulfilment of this need, in what concerns the studies forming the
material upon which custom has decided to train the youthful mind, is
indeed sadly remote--so remote as to make the mere statement of such a
claim appear preposterous. Great men, fully alive to the beauty of the
contemplations to whose service their lives are devoted, desiring that
others may share in their joys, persuade mankind to impart to the
successive generations the mechanical knowledge without which it is
impossible to cross the threshold. Dry pedants possess themselves of
the privilege of instilling this knowledge: they forget that it is to
serve but as a key to open the doors of the temple; though they spend
their lives on the steps leading up to those sacred doors, they turn
their backs upon the temple so resolutely that its very existence is
forgotten, and the eager youth, who would press forward to be
initiated to its domes and arches, is bidden to turn back and count
the steps.

Mathematics, perhaps more even than the study of Greece and Rome, has
suffered from this oblivion of its due place in civilisation. Although
tradition has decreed that the great bulk of educated men shall know
at least the elements of the subject, the reasons for which the
tradition arose are forgotten, buried beneath a great rubbish-heap of
pedantries and trivialities. To those who inquire as to the purpose of
mathematics, the usual answer will be that it facilitates the making
of machines, the travelling from place to place, and the victory over
foreign nations, whether in war or commerce. If it be objected that
these ends--all of which are of doubtful value--are not furthered by
the merely elementary study imposed upon those who do not become
expert mathematicians, the reply, it is true, will probably be that
mathematics trains the reasoning faculties. Yet the very men who make
this reply are, for the most part, unwilling to abandon the teaching
of definite fallacies, known to be such, and instinctively rejected by
the unsophisticated mind of every intelligent learner. And the
reasoning faculty itself is generally conceived, by those who urge its
cultivation, as merely a means for the avoidance of pitfalls and a
help in the discovery of rules for the guidance of practical life. All
these are undeniably important achievements to the credit of
mathematics; yet it is none of these that entitles mathematics to a
place in every liberal education. Plato, we know, regarded the
contemplation of mathematical truths as worthy of the Deity; and
Plato realised, more perhaps than any other single man, what those
elements are in human life which merit a place in heaven. There is in
mathematics, he says, "something which is _necessary_ and cannot be
set aside ... and, if I mistake not, of divine necessity; for as to
the human necessities of which the Many talk in this connection,
nothing can be more ridiculous than such an application of the words.
_Cleinias._ And what are these necessities of knowledge, Stranger,
which are divine and not human? _Athenian._ Those things without some
use or knowledge of which a man cannot become a God to the world, nor
a spirit, nor yet a hero, nor able earnestly to think and care for
man" (_Laws_, p. 818).[10] Such was Plato's judgment of mathematics;
but the mathematicians do not read Plato, while those who read him
know no mathematics, and regard his opinion upon this question as
merely a curious aberration.

Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme
beauty--a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without
appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous
trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a
stern perfection such as only the greatest art can show. The true
spirit of delight, the exaltation, the sense of being more than man,
which is the touchstone of the highest excellence, is to be found in
mathematics as surely as in poetry. What is best in mathematics
deserves not merely to be learnt as a task, but to be assimilated as a
part of daily thought, and brought again and again before the mind
with ever-renewed encouragement. Real life is, to most men, a long
second-best, a perpetual compromise between the ideal and the
possible; but the world of pure reason knows no compromise, no
practical limitations, no barrier to the creative activity embodying
in splendid edifices the passionate aspiration after the perfect from
which all great work springs. Remote from human passions, remote even
from the pitiful facts of nature, the generations have gradually
created an ordered cosmos, where pure thought can dwell as in its
natural home, and where one, at least, of our nobler impulses can
escape from the dreary exile of the actual world.

So little, however, have mathematicians aimed at beauty, that hardly
anything in their work has had this conscious purpose. Much, owing to
irrepressible instincts, which were better than avowed beliefs, has
been moulded by an unconscious taste; but much also has been spoilt by
false notions of what was fitting. The characteristic excellence of
mathematics is only to be found where the reasoning is rigidly
logical: the rules of logic are to mathematics what those of structure
are to architecture. In the most beautiful work, a chain of argument
is presented in which every link is important on its own account, in
which there is an air of ease and lucidity throughout, and the
premises achieve more than would have been thought possible, by means
which appear natural and inevitable. Literature embodies what is
general in particular circumstances whose universal significance
shines through their individual dress; but mathematics endeavours to
present whatever is most general in its purity, without any irrelevant
trappings.

How should the teaching of mathematics be conducted so as to
communicate to the learner as much as possible of this high ideal?
Here experience must, in a great measure, be our guide; but some
maxims may result from our consideration of the ultimate purpose to be
achieved.

One of the chief ends served by mathematics, when rightly taught, is
to awaken the learner's belief in reason, his confidence in the truth
of what has been demonstrated, and in the value of demonstration. This
purpose is not served by existing instruction; but it is easy to see
ways in which it might be served. At present, in what concerns
arithmetic, the boy or girl is given a set of rules, which present
themselves as neither true nor false, but as merely the will of the
teacher, the way in which, for some unfathomable reason, the teacher
prefers to have the game played. To some degree, in a study of such
definite practical utility, this is no doubt unavoidable; but as soon
as possible, the reasons of rules should be set forth by whatever
means most readily appeal to the childish mind. In geometry, instead
of the tedious apparatus of fallacious proofs for obvious truisms
which constitutes the beginning of Euclid, the learner should be
allowed at first to assume the truth of everything obvious, and should
be instructed in the demonstrations of theorems which are at once
startling and easily verifiable by actual drawing, such as those in
which it is shown that three or more lines meet in a point. In this
way belief is generated; it is seen that reasoning may lead to
startling conclusions, which nevertheless the facts will verify; and
thus the instinctive distrust of whatever is abstract or rational is
gradually overcome. Where theorems are difficult, they should be first
taught as exercises in geometrical drawing, until the figure has
become thoroughly familiar; it will then be an agreeable advance to be
taught the logical connections of the various lines or circles that
occur. It is desirable also that the figure illustrating a theorem
should be drawn in all possible cases and shapes, that so the abstract
relations with which geometry is concerned may of themselves emerge
as the residue of similarity amid such great apparent diversity. In
this way the abstract demonstrations should form but a small part of
the instruction, and should be given when, by familiarity with
concrete illustrations, they have come to be felt as the natural
embodiment of visible fact. In this early stage proofs should not be
given with pedantic fullness; definitely fallacious methods, such as
that of superposition, should be rigidly excluded from the first, but
where, without such methods, the proof would be very difficult, the
result should be rendered acceptable by arguments and illustrations
which are explicitly contrasted with demonstrations.

In the beginning of algebra, even the most intelligent child finds, as
a rule, very great difficulty. The use of letters is a mystery, which
seems to have no purpose except mystification. It is almost
impossible, at first, not to think that every letter stands for some
particular number, if only the teacher would reveal _what_ number it
stands for. The fact is, that in algebra the mind is first taught to
consider general truths, truths which are not asserted to hold only of
this or that particular thing, but of any one of a whole group of
things. It is in the power of understanding and discovering such
truths that the mastery of the intellect over the whole world of
things actual and possible resides; and ability to deal with the
general as such is one of the gifts that a mathematical education
should bestow. But how little, as a rule, is the teacher of algebra
able to explain the chasm which divides it from arithmetic, and how
little is the learner assisted in his groping efforts at
comprehension! Usually the method that has been adopted in arithmetic
is continued: rules are set forth, with no adequate explanation of
their grounds; the pupil learns to use the rules blindly, and
presently, when he is able to obtain the answer that the teacher
desires, he feels that he has mastered the difficulties of the
subject. But of inner comprehension of the processes employed he has
probably acquired almost nothing.

When algebra has been learnt, all goes smoothly until we reach those
studies in which the notion of infinity is employed--the infinitesimal
calculus and the whole of higher mathematics. The solution of the
difficulties which formerly surrounded the mathematical infinite is
probably the greatest achievement of which our own age has to boast.
Since the beginnings of Greek thought these difficulties have been
known; in every age the finest intellects have vainly endeavoured to
answer the apparently unanswerable questions that had been asked by
Zeno the Eleatic. At last Georg Cantor has found the answer, and has
conquered for the intellect a new and vast province which had been
given over to Chaos and old Night. It was assumed as self-evident,
until Cantor and Dedekind established the opposite, that if, from any
collection of things, some were taken away, the number of things left
must always be less than the original number of things. This
assumption, as a matter of fact, holds only of finite collections; and
the rejection of it, where the infinite is concerned, has been shown
to remove all the difficulties that had hitherto baffled human reason
in this matter, and to render possible the creation of an exact
science of the infinite. This stupendous fact ought to produce a
revolution in the higher teaching of mathematics; it has itself added
immeasurably to the educational value of the subject, and it has at
last given the means of treating with logical precision many studies
which, until lately, were wrapped in fallacy and obscurity. By those
who were educated on the old lines, the new work is considered to be
appallingly difficult, abstruse, and obscure; and it must be confessed
that the discoverer, as is so often the case, has hardly himself
emerged from the mists which the light of his intellect is dispelling.
But inherently, the new doctrine of the infinite, to all candid and
inquiring minds, has facilitated the mastery of higher mathematics;
for hitherto, it has been necessary to learn, by a long process of
sophistication, to give assent to arguments which, on first
acquaintance, were rightly judged to be confused and erroneous. So far
from producing a fearless belief in reason, a bold rejection of
whatever failed to fulfil the strictest requirements of logic, a
mathematical training, during the past two centuries, encouraged the
belief that many things, which a rigid inquiry would reject as
fallacious, must yet be accepted because they work in what the
mathematician calls "practice." By this means, a timid, compromising
spirit, or else a sacerdotal belief in mysteries not intelligible to
the profane, has been bred where reason alone should have ruled. All
this it is now time to sweep away; let those who wish to penetrate
into the arcana of mathematics be taught at once the true theory in
all its logical purity, and in the concatenation established by the
very essence of the entities concerned.

If we are considering mathematics as an end in itself, and not as a
technical training for engineers, it is very desirable to preserve the
purity and strictness of its reasoning. Accordingly those who have
attained a sufficient familiarity with its easier portions should be
led backward from propositions to which they have assented as
self-evident to more and more fundamental principles from which what
had previously appeared as premises can be deduced. They should be
taught--what the theory of infinity very aptly illustrates--that many
propositions seem self-evident to the untrained mind which,
nevertheless, a nearer scrutiny shows to be false. By this means they
will be led to a sceptical inquiry into first principles, an
examination of the foundations upon which the whole edifice of
reasoning is built, or, to take perhaps a more fitting metaphor, the
great trunk from which the spreading branches spring. At this stage,
it is well to study afresh the elementary portions of mathematics,
asking no longer merely whether a given proposition is true, but also
how it grows out of the central principles of logic. Questions of this
nature can now be answered with a precision and certainty which were
formerly quite impossible; and in the chains of reasoning that the
answer requires the unity of all mathematical studies at last unfolds
itself.

In the great majority of mathematical text-books there is a total lack
of unity in method and of systematic development of a central theme.
Propositions of very diverse kinds are proved by whatever means are
thought most easily intelligible, and much space is devoted to mere
curiosities which in no way contribute to the main argument. But in
the greatest works, unity and inevitability are felt as in the
unfolding of a drama; in the premisses a subject is proposed for
consideration, and in every subsequent step some definite advance is
made towards mastery of its nature. The love of system, of
interconnection, which is perhaps the inmost essence of the
intellectual impulse, can find free play in mathematics as nowhere
else. The learner who feels this impulse must not be repelled by an
array of meaningless examples or distracted by amusing oddities, but
must be encouraged to dwell upon central principles, to become
familiar with the structure of the various subjects which are put
before him, to travel easily over the steps of the more important
deductions. In this way a good tone of mind is cultivated, and
selective attention is taught to dwell by preference upon what is
weighty and essential.

When the separate studies into which mathematics is divided have each
been viewed as a logical whole, as a natural growth from the
propositions which constitute their principles, the learner will be
able to understand the fundamental science which unifies and
systematises the whole of deductive reasoning. This is symbolic
logic--a study which, though it owes its inception to Aristotle, is
yet, in its wider developments, a product, almost wholly, of the
nineteenth century, and is indeed, in the present day, still growing
with great rapidity. The true method of discovery in symbolic logic,
and probably also the best method for introducing the study to a
learner acquainted with other parts of mathematics, is the analysis of
actual examples of deductive reasoning, with a view to the discovery
of the principles employed. These principles, for the most part, are
so embedded in our ratiocinative instincts, that they are employed
quite unconsciously, and can be dragged to light only by much patient
effort. But when at last they have been found, they are seen to be few
in number, and to be the sole source of everything in pure
mathematics. The discovery that all mathematics follows inevitably
from a small collection of fundamental laws is one which immeasurably
enhances the intellectual beauty of the whole; to those who have been
oppressed by the fragmentary and incomplete nature of most existing
chains of deduction this discovery comes with all the overwhelming
force of a revelation; like a palace emerging from the autumn mist as
the traveller ascends an Italian hill-side, the stately storeys of the
mathematical edifice appear in their due order and proportion, with a
new perfection in every part.

Until symbolic logic had acquired its present development, the
principles upon which mathematics depends were always supposed to be
philosophical, and discoverable only by the uncertain, unprogressive
methods hitherto employed by philosophers. So long as this was
thought, mathematics seemed to be not autonomous, but dependent upon a
study which had quite other methods than its own. Moreover, since the
nature of the postulates from which arithmetic, analysis, and geometry
are to be deduced was wrapped in all the traditional obscurities of
metaphysical discussion, the edifice built upon such dubious
foundations began to be viewed as no better than a castle in the air.
In this respect, the discovery that the true principles are as much a
part of mathematics as any of their consequences has very greatly
increased the intellectual satisfaction to be obtained. This
satisfaction ought not to be refused to learners capable of enjoying
it, for it is of a kind to increase our respect for human powers and
our knowledge of the beauties belonging to the abstract world.

Philosophers have commonly held that the laws of logic, which underlie
mathematics, are laws of thought, laws regulating the operations of
our minds. By this opinion the true dignity of reason is very greatly
lowered: it ceases to be an investigation into the very heart and
immutable essence of all things actual and possible, becoming,
instead, an inquiry into something more or less human and subject to
our limitations. The contemplation of what is non-human, the discovery
that our minds are capable of dealing with material not created by
them, above all, the realisation that beauty belongs to the outer
world as to the inner, are the chief means of overcoming the terrible
sense of impotence, of weakness, of exile amid hostile powers, which
is too apt to result from acknowledging the all-but omnipotence of
alien forces. To reconcile us, by the exhibition of its awful beauty,
to the reign of Fate--which is merely the literary personification of
these forces--is the task of tragedy. But mathematics takes us still
further from what is human, into the region of absolute necessity, to
which not only the actual world, but every possible world, must
conform; and even here it builds a habitation, or rather finds a
habitation eternally standing, where our ideals are fully satisfied
and our best hopes are not thwarted. It is only when we thoroughly
understand the entire independence of ourselves, which belongs to this
world that reason finds, that we can adequately realise the profound
importance of its beauty.

Not only is mathematics independent of us and our thoughts, but in
another sense we and the whole universe of existing things are
independent of mathematics. The apprehension of this purely ideal
character is indispensable, if we are to understand rightly the place
of mathematics as one among the arts. It was formerly supposed that
pure reason could decide, in some respects, as to the nature of the
actual world: geometry, at least, was thought to deal with the space
in which we live. But we now know that pure mathematics can never
pronounce upon questions of actual existence: the world of reason, in
a sense, controls the world of fact, but it is not at any point
creative of fact, and in the application of its results to the world
in time and space, its certainty and precision are lost among
approximations and working hypotheses. The objects considered by
mathematicians have, in the past, been mainly of a kind suggested by
phenomena; but from such restrictions the abstract imagination should
be wholly free. A reciprocal liberty must thus be accorded: reason
cannot dictate to the world of facts, but the facts cannot restrict
reason's privilege of dealing with whatever objects its love of beauty
may cause to seem worthy of consideration. Here, as elsewhere, we
build up our own ideals out of the fragments to be found in the world;
and in the end it is hard to say whether the result is a creation or a
discovery.

It is very desirable, in instruction, not merely to persuade the
student of the accuracy of important theorems, but to persuade him in
the way which itself has, of all possible ways, the most beauty. The
true interest of a demonstration is not, as traditional modes of
exposition suggest, concentrated wholly in the result; where this does
occur, it must be viewed as a defect, to be remedied, if possible, by
so generalising the steps of the proof that each becomes important in
and for itself. An argument which serves only to prove a conclusion is
like a story subordinated to some moral which it is meant to teach:
for sthetic perfection no part of the whole should be merely a means.
A certain practical spirit, a desire for rapid progress, for conquest
of new realms, is responsible for the undue emphasis upon results
which prevails in mathematical instruction. The better way is to
propose some theme for consideration--in geometry, a figure having
important properties; in analysis, a function of which the study is
illuminating, and so on. Whenever proofs depend upon some only of the
marks by which we define the object to be studied, these marks should
be isolated and investigated on their own account. For it is a defect,
in an argument, to employ more premisses than the conclusion demands:
what mathematicians call elegance results from employing only the
essential principles in virtue of which the thesis is true. It is a
merit in Euclid that he advances as far as he is able to go without
employing the axiom of parallels--not, as is often said, because this
axiom is inherently objectionable, but because, in mathematics, every
new axiom diminishes the generality of the resulting theorems, and the
greatest possible generality is before all things to be sought.

Of the effects of mathematics outside its own sphere more has been
written than on the subject of its own proper ideal. The effect upon
philosophy has, in the past, been most notable, but most varied; in
the seventeenth century, idealism and rationalism, in the eighteenth,
materialism and sensationalism, seemed equally its offspring. Of the
effect which it is likely to have in the future it would be very rash
to say much; but in one respect a good result appears probable.
Against that kind of scepticism which abandons the pursuit of ideals
because the road is arduous and the goal not certainly attainable,
mathematics, within its own sphere, is a complete answer. Too often it
is said that there is no absolute truth, but only opinion and private
judgment; that each of us is conditioned, in his view of the world, by
his own peculiarities, his own taste and bias; that there is no
external kingdom of truth to which, by patience and discipline, we may
at last obtain admittance, but only truth for me, for you, for every
separate person. By this habit of mind one of the chief ends of human
effort is denied, and the supreme virtue of candour, of fearless
acknowledgment of what is, disappears from our moral vision. Of such
scepticism mathematics is a perpetual reproof; for its edifice of
truths stands unshakable and inexpungable to all the weapons of
doubting cynicism.

The effects of mathematics upon practical life, though they should not
be regarded as the motive of our studies, may be used to answer a
doubt to which the solitary student must always be liable. In a world
so full of evil and suffering, retirement into the cloister of
contemplation, to the enjoyment of delights which, however noble, must
always be for the few only, cannot but appear as a somewhat selfish
refusal to share the burden imposed upon others by accidents in which
justice plays no part. Have any of us the right, we ask, to withdraw
from present evils, to leave our fellow-men unaided, while we live a
life which, though arduous and austere, is yet plainly good in its own
nature? When these questions arise, the true answer is, no doubt, that
some must keep alive the sacred fire, some must preserve, in every
generation, the haunting vision which shadows forth the goal of so
much striving. But when, as must sometimes occur, this answer seems
too cold, when we are almost maddened by the spectacle of sorrows to
which we bring no help, then we may reflect that indirectly the
mathematician often does more for human happiness than any of his more
practically active contemporaries. The history of science abundantly
proves that a body of abstract propositions--even if, as in the case
of conic sections, it remains two thousand years without effect upon
daily life--may yet, at any moment, be used to cause a revolution in
the habitual thoughts and occupations of every citizen. The use of
steam and electricity--to take striking instances--is rendered
possible only by mathematics. In the results of abstract thought the
world possesses a capital of which the employment in enriching the
common round has no hitherto discoverable limits. Nor does experience
give any means of deciding what parts of mathematics will be found
useful. Utility, therefore, can be only a consolation in moments of
discouragement, not a guide in directing our studies.

For the health of the moral life, for ennobling the tone of an age or
a nation, the austerer virtues have a strange power, exceeding the
power of those not informed and purified by thought. Of these austerer
virtues the love of truth is the chief, and in mathematics, more than
elsewhere, the love of truth may find encouragement for waning faith.
Every great study is not only an end in itself, but also a means of
creating and sustaining a lofty habit of mind; and this purpose should
be kept always in view throughout the teaching and learning of
mathematics.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] This passage was pointed out to me by Professor Gilbert Murray.




V

MATHEMATICS AND THE METAPHYSICIANS


The nineteenth century, which prided itself upon the invention of
steam and evolution, might have derived a more legitimate title to
fame from the discovery of pure mathematics. This science, like most
others, was baptised long before it was born; and thus we find writers
before the nineteenth century alluding to what they called pure
mathematics. But if they had been asked what this subject was, they
would only have been able to say that it consisted of Arithmetic,
Algebra, Geometry, and so on. As to what these studies had in common,
and as to what distinguished them from applied mathematics, our
ancestors were completely in the dark.

Pure mathematics was discovered by Boole, in a work which he called
the _Laws of Thought_ (1854). This work abounds in asseverations that
it is not mathematical, the fact being that Boole was too modest to
suppose his book the first ever written on mathematics. He was also
mistaken in supposing that he was dealing with the laws of thought:
the question how people actually think was quite irrelevant to him,
and if his book had really contained the laws of thought, it was
curious that no one should ever have thought in such a way before. His
book was in fact concerned with formal logic, and this is the same
thing as mathematics.

Pure mathematics consists entirely of assertions to the effect that,
if such and such a proposition is true of _anything_, then such and
such another proposition is true of that thing. It is essential not to
discuss whether the first proposition is really true, and not to
mention what the anything is, of which it is supposed to be true. Both
these points would belong to applied mathematics. We start, in pure
mathematics, from certain rules of inference, by which we can infer
that _if_ one proposition is true, then so is some other proposition.
These rules of inference constitute the major part of the principles
of formal logic. We then take any hypothesis that seems amusing, and
deduce its consequences. _If_ our hypothesis is about _anything_, and
not about some one or more particular things, then our deductions
constitute mathematics. Thus mathematics may be defined as the subject
in which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we
are saying is true. People who have been puzzled by the beginnings of
mathematics will, I hope, find comfort in this definition, and will
probably agree that it is accurate.

As one of the chief triumphs of modern mathematics consists in having
discovered what mathematics really is, a few more words on this
subject may not be amiss. It is common to start any branch of
mathematics--for instance, Geometry--with a certain number of
primitive ideas, supposed incapable of definition, and a certain
number of primitive propositions or axioms, supposed incapable of
proof. Now the fact is that, though there are indefinables and
indemonstrables in every branch of applied mathematics, there are none
in pure mathematics except such as belong to general logic. Logic,
broadly speaking, is distinguished by the fact that its propositions
can be put into a form in which they apply to anything whatever. All
pure mathematics--Arithmetic, Analysis, and Geometry--is built up by
combinations of the primitive ideas of logic, and its propositions are
deduced from the general axioms of logic, such as the syllogism and
the other rules of inference. And this is no longer a dream or an
aspiration. On the contrary, over the greater and more difficult part
of the domain of mathematics, it has been already accomplished; in the
few remaining cases, there is no special difficulty, and it is now
being rapidly achieved. Philosophers have disputed for ages whether
such deduction was possible; mathematicians have sat down and made the
deduction. For the philosophers there is now nothing left but graceful
acknowledgments.

The subject of formal logic, which has thus at last shown itself to be
identical with mathematics, was, as every one knows, invented by
Aristotle, and formed the chief study (other than theology) of the
Middle Ages. But Aristotle never got beyond the syllogism, which is a
very small part of the subject, and the schoolmen never got beyond
Aristotle. If any proof were required of our superiority to the
medival doctors, it might be found in this. Throughout the Middle
Ages, almost all the best intellects devoted themselves to formal
logic, whereas in the nineteenth century only an infinitesimal
proportion of the world's thought went into this subject.
Nevertheless, in each decade since 1850 more has been done to advance
the subject than in the whole period from Aristotle to Leibniz. People
have discovered how to make reasoning symbolic, as it is in Algebra,
so that deductions are effected by mathematical rules. They have
discovered many rules besides the syllogism, and a new branch of
logic, called the Logic of Relatives,[11] has been invented to deal
with topics that wholly surpassed the powers of the old logic, though
they form the chief contents of mathematics.

It is not easy for the lay mind to realise the importance of symbolism
in discussing the foundations of mathematics, and the explanation may
perhaps seem strangely paradoxical. The fact is that symbolism is
useful because it makes things difficult. (This is not true of the
advanced parts of mathematics, but only of the beginnings.) What we
wish to know is, what can be deduced from what. Now, in the
beginnings, everything is self-evident; and it is very hard to see
whether one self-evident proposition follows from another or not.
Obviousness is always the enemy to correctness. Hence we invent some
new and difficult symbolism, in which nothing seems obvious. Then we
set up certain rules for operating on the symbols, and the whole thing
becomes mechanical. In this way we find out what must be taken as
premiss and what can be demonstrated or defined. For instance, the
whole of Arithmetic and Algebra has been shown to require three
indefinable notions and five indemonstrable propositions. But without
a symbolism it would have been very hard to find this out. It is so
obvious that two and two are four, that we can hardly make ourselves
sufficiently sceptical to doubt whether it can be proved. And the same
holds in other cases where self-evident things are to be proved.

But the proof of self-evident propositions may seem, to the
uninitiated, a somewhat frivolous occupation. To this we might reply
that it is often by no means self-evident that one obvious proposition
follows from another obvious proposition; so that we are really
discovering new truths when we prove what is evident by a method which
is not evident. But a more interesting retort is, that since people
have tried to prove obvious propositions, they have found that many of
them are false. Self-evidence is often a mere will-o'-the-wisp, which
is sure to lead us astray if we take it as our guide. For instance,
nothing is plainer than that a whole always has more terms than a
part, or that a number is increased by adding one to it. But these
propositions are now known to be usually false. Most numbers are
infinite, and if a number is infinite you may add ones to it as long
as you like without disturbing it in the least. One of the merits of a
proof is that it instils a certain doubt as to the result proved; and
when what is obvious can be proved in some cases, but not in others,
it becomes possible to suppose that in these other cases it is false.

The great master of the art of formal reasoning, among the men of our
own day, is an Italian, Professor Peano, of the University of
Turin.[12] He has reduced the greater part of mathematics (and he or
his followers will, in time, have reduced the whole) to strict
symbolic form, in which there are no words at all. In the ordinary
mathematical books, there are no doubt fewer words than most readers
would wish. Still, little phrases occur, such as _therefore, let us
assume, consider_, or _hence it follows_. All these, however, are a
concession, and are swept away by Professor Peano. For instance, if we
wish to learn the whole of Arithmetic, Algebra, the Calculus, and
indeed all that is usually called pure mathematics (except Geometry),
we must start with a dictionary of three words. One symbol stands for
_zero_, another for _number_, and a third for _next after_. What these
ideas mean, it is necessary to know if you wish to become an
arithmetician. But after symbols have been invented for these three
ideas, not another word is required in the whole development. All
future symbols are symbolically explained by means of these three.
Even these three can be explained by means of the notions of
_relation_ and _class_; but this requires the Logic of Relations,
which Professor Peano has never taken up. It must be admitted that
what a mathematician has to know to begin with is not much. There are
at most a dozen notions out of which all the notions in all pure
mathematics (including Geometry) are compounded. Professor Peano, who
is assisted by a very able school of young Italian disciples, has
shown how this may be done; and although the method which he has
invented is capable of being carried a good deal further than he has
carried it, the honour of the pioneer must belong to him.

Two hundred years ago, Leibniz foresaw the science which Peano has
perfected, and endeavoured to create it. He was prevented from
succeeding by respect for the authority of Aristotle, whom he could
not believe guilty of definite, formal fallacies; but the subject
which he desired to create now exists, in spite of the patronising
contempt with which his schemes have been treated by all superior
persons. From this "Universal Characteristic," as he called it, he
hoped for a solution of all problems, and an end to all disputes. "If
controversies were to arise," he says, "there would be no more need of
disputation between two philosophers than between two accountants. For
it would suffice to take their pens in their hands, to sit down to
their desks, and to say to each other (with a friend as witness, if
they liked), 'Let us calculate.'" This optimism has now appeared to be
somewhat excessive; there still are problems whose solution is
doubtful, and disputes which calculation cannot decide. But over an
enormous field of what was formerly controversial, Leibniz's dream has
become sober fact. In the whole philosophy of mathematics, which used
to be at least as full of doubt as any other part of philosophy, order
and certainty have replaced the confusion and hesitation which
formerly reigned. Philosophers, of course, have not yet discovered
this fact, and continue to write on such subjects in the old way. But
mathematicians, at least in Italy, have now the power of treating the
principles of mathematics in an exact and masterly manner, by means of
which the certainty of mathematics extends also to mathematical
philosophy. Hence many of the topics which used to be placed among the
great mysteries--for example, the natures of infinity, of continuity,
of space, time and motion--are now no longer in any degree open to
doubt or discussion. Those who wish to know the nature of these things
need only read the works of such men as Peano or Georg Cantor; they
will there find exact and indubitable expositions of all these quondam
mysteries.

In this capricious world, nothing is more capricious than posthumous
fame. One of the most notable examples of posterity's lack of judgment
is the Eleatic Zeno. This man, who may be regarded as the founder of
the philosophy of infinity, appears in Plato's Parmenides in the
privileged position of instructor to Socrates. He invented four
arguments, all immeasurably subtle and profound, to prove that motion
is impossible, that Achilles can never overtake the tortoise, and that
an arrow in flight is really at rest. After being refuted by
Aristotle, and by every subsequent philosopher from that day to our
own, these arguments were reinstated, and made the basis of a
mathematical renaissance, by a German professor, who probably never
dreamed of any connection between himself and Zeno. Weierstrass,[13]
by strictly banishing from mathematics the use of infinitesimals, has
at last shown that we live in an unchanging world, and that the arrow
in its flight is truly at rest. Zeno's only error lay in inferring (if
he did infer) that, because there is no such thing as a state of
change, therefore the world is in the same state at any one time as at
any other. This is a consequence which by no means follows; and in
this respect, the German mathematician is more constructive than the
ingenious Greek. Weierstrass has been able, by embodying his views in
mathematics, where familiarity with truth eliminates the vulgar
prejudices of common sense, to invest Zeno's paradoxes with the
respectable air of platitudes; and if the result is less delightful to
the lover of reason than Zeno's bold defiance, it is at any rate more
calculated to appease the mass of academic mankind.

Zeno was concerned, as a matter of fact, with three problems, each
presented by motion, but each more abstract than motion, and capable
of a purely arithmetical treatment. These are the problems of the
infinitesimal, the infinite, and continuity. To state clearly the
difficulties involved, was to accomplish perhaps the hardest part of
the philosopher's task. This was done by Zeno. From him to our own
day, the finest intellects of each generation in turn attacked the
problems, but achieved, broadly speaking, nothing. In our own time,
however, three men--Weierstrass, Dedekind, and Cantor--have not merely
advanced the three problems, but have completely solved them. The
solutions, for those acquainted with mathematics, are so clear as to
leave no longer the slightest doubt or difficulty. This achievement is
probably the greatest of which our age has to boast; and I know of no
age (except perhaps the golden age of Greece) which has a more
convincing proof to offer of the transcendent genius of its great men.
Of the three problems, that of the infinitesimal was solved by
Weierstrass; the solution of the other two was begun by Dedekind, and
definitively accomplished by Cantor.

The infinitesimal played formerly a great part in mathematics. It was
introduced by the Greeks, who regarded a circle as differing
infinitesimally from a polygon with a very large number of very small
equal sides. It gradually grew in importance, until, when Leibniz
invented the Infinitesimal Calculus, it seemed to become the
fundamental notion of all higher mathematics. Carlyle tells, in his
_Frederick the Great_, how Leibniz used to discourse to Queen Sophia
Charlotte of Prussia concerning the infinitely little, and how she
would reply that on that subject she needed no instruction--the
behaviour of courtiers had made her thoroughly familiar with it. But
philosophers and mathematicians--who for the most part had less
acquaintance with courts--continued to discuss this topic, though
without making any advance. The Calculus required continuity, and
continuity was supposed to require the infinitely little; but nobody
could discover what the infinitely little might be. It was plainly not
quite zero, because a sufficiently large number of infinitesimals,
added together, were seen to make up a finite whole. But nobody could
point out any fraction which was not zero, and yet not finite. Thus
there was a deadlock. But at last Weierstrass discovered that the
infinitesimal was not needed at all, and that everything could be
accomplished without it. Thus there was no longer any need to suppose
that there was such a thing. Nowadays, therefore, mathematicians are
more dignified than Leibniz: instead of talking about the infinitely
small, they talk about the infinitely great--a subject which, however
appropriate to monarchs, seems, unfortunately, to interest them even
less than the infinitely little interested the monarchs to whom
Leibniz discoursed.

The banishment of the infinitesimal has all sorts of odd consequences,
to which one has to become gradually accustomed. For example, there is
no such thing as the next moment. The interval between one moment and
the next would have to be infinitesimal, since, if we take two moments
with a finite interval between them, there are always other moments in
the interval. Thus if there are to be no infinitesimals, no two
moments are quite consecutive, but there are always other moments
between any two. Hence there must be an infinite number of moments
between any two; because if there were a finite number one would be
nearest the first of the two moments, and therefore next to it. This
might be thought to be a difficulty; but, as a matter of fact, it is
here that the philosophy of the infinite comes in, and makes all
straight.

The same sort of thing happens in space. If any piece of matter be cut
in two, and then each part be halved, and so on, the bits will become
smaller and smaller, and can theoretically be made as small as we
please. However small they may be, they can still be cut up and made
smaller still. But they will always have _some_ finite size, however
small they may be. We never reach the infinitesimal in this way, and
no finite number of divisions will bring us to points. Nevertheless
there _are_ points, only these are not to be reached by successive
divisions. Here again, the philosophy of the infinite shows us how
this is possible, and why points are not infinitesimal lengths.

As regards motion and change, we get similarly curious results. People
used to think that when a thing changes, it must be in a state of
change, and that when a thing moves, it is in a state of motion. This
is now known to be a mistake. When a body moves, all that can be said
is that it is in one place at one time and in another at another. We
must not say that it will be in a neighbouring place at the next
instant, since there is no next instant. Philosophers often tell us
that when a body is in motion, it changes its position within the
instant. To this view Zeno long ago made the fatal retort that every
body always is where it is; but a retort so simple and brief was not
of the kind to which philosophers are accustomed to give weight, and
they have continued down to our own day to repeat the same phrases
which roused the Eleatic's destructive ardour. It was only recently
that it became possible to explain motion in detail in accordance with
Zeno's platitude, and in opposition to the philosopher's paradox. We
may now at last indulge the comfortable belief that a body in motion
is just as truly where it is as a body at rest. Motion consists merely
in the fact that bodies are sometimes in one place and sometimes in
another, and that they are at intermediate places at intermediate
times. Only those who have waded through the quagmire of philosophic
speculation on this subject can realise what a liberation from antique
prejudices is involved in this simple and straightforward commonplace.

The philosophy of the infinitesimal, as we have just seen, is mainly
negative. People used to believe in it, and now they have found out
their mistake. The philosophy of the infinite, on the other hand, is
wholly positive. It was formerly supposed that infinite numbers, and
the mathematical infinite generally, were self-contradictory. But as
it was obvious that there were infinities--for example, the number of
numbers--the contradictions of infinity seemed unavoidable, and
philosophy seemed to have wandered into a "cul-de-sac." This
difficulty led to Kant's antinomies, and hence, more or less
indirectly, to much of Hegel's dialectic method. Almost all current
philosophy is upset by the fact (of which very few philosophers are as
yet aware) that all the ancient and respectable contradictions in the
notion of the infinite have been once for all disposed of. The method
by which this has been done is most interesting and instructive. In
the first place, though people had talked glibly about infinity ever
since the beginnings of Greek thought, nobody had ever thought of
asking, What is infinity? If any philosopher had been asked for a
definition of infinity, he might have produced some unintelligible
rigmarole, but he would certainly not have been able to give a
definition that had any meaning at all. Twenty years ago, roughly
speaking, Dedekind and Cantor asked this question, and, what is more
remarkable, they answered it. They found, that is to say, a perfectly
precise definition of an infinite number or an infinite collection of
things. This was the first and perhaps the greatest step. It then
remained to examine the supposed contradictions in this notion. Here
Cantor proceeded in the only proper way. He took pairs of
contradictory propositions, in which both sides of the contradiction
would be usually regarded as demonstrable, and he strictly examined
the supposed proofs. He found that all proofs adverse to infinity
involved a certain principle, at first sight obviously true, but
destructive, in its consequences, of almost all mathematics. The
proofs favourable to infinity, on the other hand, involved no
principle that had evil consequences. It thus appeared that common
sense had allowed itself to be taken in by a specious maxim, and that,
when once this maxim was rejected, all went well.

The maxim in question is, that if one collection is part of another,
the one which is a part has fewer terms than the one of which it is a
part. This maxim is true of finite numbers. For example, Englishmen
are only some among Europeans, and there are fewer Englishmen than
Europeans. But when we come to infinite numbers, this is no longer
true. This breakdown of the maxim gives us the precise definition of
infinity. A collection of terms is infinite when it contains as parts
other collections which have just as many terms as it has. If you can
take away some of the terms of a collection, without diminishing the
number of terms, then there are an infinite number of terms in the
collection. For example, there are just as many even numbers as there
are numbers altogether, since every number can be doubled. This may be
seen by putting odd and even numbers together in one row, and even
numbers alone in a row below:--

          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, _ad infinitum_.
          2, 4, 6, 8, 10, _ad infinitum_.

There are obviously just as many numbers in the row below as in the
row above, because there is one below for each one above. This
property, which was formerly thought to be a contradiction, is now
transformed into a harmless definition of infinity, and shows, in the
above case, that the number of finite numbers is infinite.

But the uninitiated may wonder how it is possible to deal with a
number which cannot be counted. It is impossible to count up _all_ the
numbers, one by one, because, however many we may count, there are
always more to follow. The fact is that counting is a very vulgar and
elementary way of finding out how many terms there are in a
collection. And in any case, counting gives us what mathematicians
call the _ordinal_ number of our terms; that is to say, it arranges
our terms in an order or series, and its result tells us what type of
series results from this arrangement. In other words, it is impossible
to count things without counting some first and others afterwards, so
that counting always has to do with order. Now when there are only a
finite number of terms, we can count them in any order we like; but
when there are an infinite number, what corresponds to counting will
give us quite different results according to the way in which we carry
out the operation. Thus the ordinal number, which results from what,
in a general sense may be called counting, depends not only upon how
many terms we have, but also (where the number of terms is infinite)
upon the way in which the terms are arranged.

The fundamental infinite numbers are not ordinal, but are what is
called _cardinal_. They are not obtained by putting our terms in order
and counting them, but by a different method, which tells us, to begin
with, whether two collections have the same number of terms, or, if
not, which is the greater.[14] It does not tell us, in the way in
which counting does, _what_ number of terms a collection has; but if
we define a number as the number of terms in such and such a
collection, then this method enables us to discover whether some other
collection that may be mentioned has more or fewer terms. An
illustration will show how this is done. If there existed some country
in which, for one reason or another, it was impossible to take a
census, but in which it was known that every man had a wife and every
woman a husband, then (provided polygamy was not a national
institution) we should know, without counting, that there were exactly
as many men as there were women in that country, neither more nor
less. This method can be applied generally. If there is some relation
which, like marriage, connects the things in one collection each with
one of the things in another collection, and vice versa, then the two
collections have the same number of terms. This was the way in which
we found that there are as many even numbers as there are numbers.
Every number can be doubled, and every even number can be halved, and
each process gives just one number corresponding to the one that is
doubled or halved. And in this way we can find any number of
collections each of which has just as many terms as there are finite
numbers. If every term of a collection can be hooked on to a number,
and all the finite numbers are used once, and only once, in the
process, then our collection must have just as many terms as there are
finite numbers. This is the general method by which the numbers of
infinite collections are defined.

But it must not be supposed that all infinite numbers are equal. On
the contrary, there are infinitely more infinite numbers than finite
ones. There are more ways of arranging the finite numbers in different
types of series than there are finite numbers. There are probably more
points in space and more moments in time than there are finite
numbers. There are exactly as many fractions as whole numbers,
although there are an infinite number of fractions between any two
whole numbers. But there are more irrational numbers than there are
whole numbers or fractions. There are probably exactly as many points
in space as there are irrational numbers, and exactly as many points
on a line a millionth of an inch long as in the whole of infinite
space. There is a greatest of all infinite numbers, which is the
number of things altogether, of every sort and kind. It is obvious
that there cannot be a greater number than this, because, if
everything has been taken, there is nothing left to add. Cantor has a
proof that there is no greatest number, and if this proof were valid,
the contradictions of infinity would reappear in a sublimated form.
But in this one point, the master has been guilty of a very subtle
fallacy, which I hope to explain in some future work.[15]

We can now understand why Zeno believed that Achilles cannot overtake
the tortoise and why as a matter of fact he can overtake it. We shall
see that all the people who disagreed with Zeno had no right to do so,
because they all accepted premises from which his conclusion followed.
The argument is this: Let Achilles and the tortoise start along a road
at the same time, the tortoise (as is only fair) being allowed a
handicap. Let Achilles go twice as fast as the tortoise, or ten times
or a hundred times as fast. Then he will never reach the tortoise. For
at every moment the tortoise is somewhere and Achilles is somewhere;
and neither is ever twice in the same place while the race is going
on. Thus the tortoise goes to just as many places as Achilles does,
because each is in one place at one moment, and in another at any
other moment. But if Achilles were to catch up with the tortoise, the
places where the tortoise would have been would be only part of the
places where Achilles would have been. Here, we must suppose, Zeno
appealed to the maxim that the whole has more terms than the part.[16]
Thus if Achilles were to overtake the tortoise, he would have been in
more places than the tortoise; but we saw that he must, in any period,
be in exactly as many places as the tortoise. Hence we infer that he
can never catch the tortoise. This argument is strictly correct, if we
allow the axiom that the whole has more terms than the part. As the
conclusion is absurd, the axiom must be rejected, and then all goes
well. But there is no good word to be said for the philosophers of the
past two thousand years and more, who have all allowed the axiom and
denied the conclusion.

The retention of this axiom leads to absolute contradictions, while
its rejection leads only to oddities. Some of these oddities, it must
be confessed, are very odd. One of them, which I call the paradox of
Tristram Shandy, is the converse of the Achilles, and shows that the
tortoise, if you give him time, will go just as far as Achilles.
Tristram Shandy, as we know, employed two years in chronicling the
first two days of his life, and lamented that, at this rate, material
would accumulate faster than he could deal with it, so that, as years
went by, he would be farther and farther from the end of his history.
Now I maintain that, if he had lived for ever, and had not wearied of
his task, then, even if his life had continued as event fully as it
began, no part of his biography would have remained unwritten. For
consider: the hundredth day will be described in the hundredth year,
the thousandth in the thousandth year, and so on. Whatever day we may
choose as so far on that he cannot hope to reach it, that day will be
described in the corresponding year. Thus any day that may be
mentioned will be written up sooner or later, and therefore no part of
the biography will remain permanently unwritten. This paradoxical but
perfectly true proposition depends upon the fact that the number of
days in all time is no greater than the number of years.

Thus on the subject of infinity it is impossible to avoid conclusions
which at first sight appear paradoxical, and this is the reason why so
many philosophers have supposed that there were inherent
contradictions in the infinite. But a little practice enables one to
grasp the true principles of Cantor's doctrine, and to acquire new and
better instincts as to the true and the false. The oddities then
become no odder than the people at the antipodes, who used to be
thought impossible because they would find it so inconvenient to stand
on their heads.

The solution of the problems concerning infinity has enabled Cantor to
solve also the problems of continuity. Of this, as of infinity, he has
given a perfectly precise definition, and has shown that there are no
contradictions in the notion so defined. But this subject is so
technical that it is impossible to give any account of it here.

The notion of continuity depends upon that of _order_, since
continuity is merely a particular type of order. Mathematics has, in
modern times, brought order into greater and greater prominence. In
former days, it was supposed (and philosophers are still apt to
suppose) that quantity was the fundamental notion of mathematics. But
nowadays, quantity is banished altogether, except from one little
corner of Geometry, while order more and more reigns supreme. The
investigation of different kinds of series and their relations is now
a very large part of mathematics, and it has been found that this
investigation can be conducted without any reference to quantity, and,
for the most part, without any reference to number. All types of
series are capable of formal definition, and their properties can be
deduced from the principles of symbolic logic by means of the Algebra
of Relatives. The notion of a limit, which is fundamental in the
greater part of higher mathematics, used to be defined by means of
quantity, as a term to which the terms of some series approximate as
nearly as we please. But nowadays the limit is defined quite
differently, and the series which it limits may not approximate to it
at all. This improvement also is due to Cantor, and it is one which
has revolutionised mathematics. Only order is now relevant to limits.
Thus, for instance, the smallest of the infinite integers is the limit
of the finite integers, though all finite integers are at an infinite
distance from it. The study of different types of series is a general
subject of which the study of ordinal numbers (mentioned above) is a
special and very interesting branch. But the unavoidable
technicalities of this subject render it impossible to explain to any
but professed mathematicians.

Geometry, like Arithmetic, has been subsumed, in recent times, under
the general study of order. It was formerly supposed that Geometry was
the study of the nature of the space in which we live, and accordingly
it was urged, by those who held that what exists can only be known
empirically, that Geometry should really be regarded as belonging to
applied mathematics. But it has gradually appeared, by the increase of
non-Euclidean systems, that Geometry throws no more light upon the
nature of space than Arithmetic throws upon the population of the
United States. Geometry is a whole collection of deductive sciences
based on a corresponding collection of sets of axioms. One set of
axioms is Euclid's; other equally good sets of axioms lead to other
results. Whether Euclid's axioms are true, is a question as to which
the pure mathematician is indifferent; and, what is more, it is a
question which it is theoretically impossible to answer with certainty
in the affirmative. It might possibly be shown, by very careful
measurements, that Euclid's axioms are false; but no measurements
could ever assure us (owing to the errors of observation) that they
are exactly true. Thus the geometer leaves to the man of science to
decide, as best he may, what axioms are most nearly true in the actual
world. The geometer takes any set of axioms that seem interesting, and
deduces their consequences. What defines Geometry, in this sense, is
that the axioms must give rise to a series of more than one dimension.
And it is thus that Geometry becomes a department in the study of
order.

In Geometry, as in other parts of mathematics, Peano and his disciples
have done work of the very greatest merit as regards principles.
Formerly, it was held by philosophers and mathematicians alike that
the proofs in Geometry depended on the figure; nowadays, this is known
to be false. In the best books there are no figures at all. The
reasoning proceeds by the strict rules of formal logic from a set of
axioms laid down to begin with. If a figure is used, all sorts of
things seem obviously to follow, which no formal reasoning can prove
from the explicit axioms, and which, as a matter of fact, are only
accepted because they are obvious. By banishing the figure, it becomes
possible to discover _all_ the axioms that are needed; and in this way
all sorts of possibilities, which would have otherwise remained
undetected, are brought to light.

One great advance, from the point of view of correctness, has been
made by introducing points as they are required, and not starting, as
was formerly done, by assuming the whole of space. This method is due
partly to Peano, partly to another Italian named Fano. To those
unaccustomed to it, it has an air of somewhat wilful pedantry. In this
way, we begin with the following axioms: (1) There is a class of
entities called _points_. (2) There is at least one point. (3) If _a_
be a point, there is at least one other point besides _a_. Then we
bring in the straight line joining two points, and begin again with
(4), namely, on the straight line joining _a_ and _b_, there is at
least one other point besides _a_ and _b_. (5) There is at least one
point not on the line _ab_. And so we go on, till we have the means of
obtaining as many points as we require. But the word _space_, as Peano
humorously remarks, is one for which Geometry has no use at all.

The rigid methods employed by modern geometers have deposed Euclid
from his pinnacle of correctness. It was thought, until recent times,
that, as Sir Henry Savile remarked in 1621, there were only two
blemishes in Euclid, the theory of parallels and the theory of
proportion. It is now known that these are almost the only points in
which Euclid is free from blemish. Countless errors are involved in
his first eight propositions. That is to say, not only is it doubtful
whether his axioms are true, which is a comparatively trivial matter,
but it is certain that his propositions do not follow from the axioms
which he enunciates. A vastly greater number of axioms, which Euclid
unconsciously employs, are required for the proof of his propositions.
Even in the first proposition of all, where he constructs an
equilateral triangle on a given base, he uses two circles which are
assumed to intersect. But no explicit axiom assures us that they do
so, and in some kinds of spaces they do not always intersect. It is
quite doubtful whether our space belongs to one of these kinds or not.
Thus Euclid fails entirely to prove his point in the very first
proposition. As he is certainly not an easy author, and is terribly
long-winded, he has no longer any but an historical interest. Under
these circumstances, it is nothing less than a scandal that he should
still be taught to boys in England.[17] A book should have either
intelligibility or correctness; to combine the two is impossible, but
to lack both is to be unworthy of such a place as Euclid has occupied
in education.

The most remarkable result of modern methods in mathematics is the
importance of symbolic logic and of rigid formalism. Mathematicians,
under the influence of Weierstrass, have shown in modern times a care
for accuracy, and an aversion to slipshod reasoning, such as had not
been known among them previously since the time of the Greeks. The
great inventions of the seventeenth century--Analytical Geometry and
the Infinitesimal Calculus--were so fruitful in new results that
mathematicians had neither time nor inclination to examine their
foundations. Philosophers, who should have taken up the task, had too
little mathematical ability to invent the new branches of mathematics
which have now been found necessary for any adequate discussion. Thus
mathematicians were only awakened from their "dogmatic slumbers" when
Weierstrass and his followers showed that many of their most cherished
propositions are in general false. Macaulay, contrasting the certainty
of mathematics with the uncertainty of philosophy, asks who ever heard
of a reaction against Taylor's theorem? If he had lived now, he
himself might have heard of such a reaction, for this is precisely one
of the theorems which modern investigations have overthrown. Such rude
shocks to mathematical faith have produced that love of formalism
which appears, to those who are ignorant of its motive, to be mere
outrageous pedantry.

The proof that all pure mathematics, including Geometry, is nothing
but formal logic, is a fatal blow to the Kantian philosophy. Kant,
rightly perceiving that Euclid's propositions could not be deduced
from Euclid's axioms without the help of the figures, invented a
theory of knowledge to account for this fact; and it accounted so
successfully that, when the fact is shown to be a mere defect in
Euclid, and not a result of the nature of geometrical reasoning,
Kant's theory also has to be abandoned. The whole doctrine of _a
priori_ intuitions, by which Kant explained the possibility of pure
mathematics, is wholly inapplicable to mathematics in its present
form. The Aristotelian doctrines of the schoolmen come nearer in
spirit to the doctrines which modern mathematics inspire; but the
schoolmen were hampered by the fact that their formal logic was very
defective, and that the philosophical logic based upon the syllogism
showed a corresponding narrowness. What is now required is to give the
greatest possible development to mathematical logic, to allow to the
full the importance of relations, and then to found upon this secure
basis a new philosophical logic, which may hope to borrow some of the
exactitude and certainty of its mathematical foundation. If this can
be successfully accomplished, there is every reason to hope that the
near future will be as great an epoch in pure philosophy as the
immediate past has been in the principles of mathematics. Great
triumphs inspire great hopes; and pure thought may achieve, within our
generation, such results as will place our time, in this respect, on a
level with the greatest age of Greece.[18]

FOOTNOTES:

[11] This subject is due in the main to Mr. C.S. Peirce.

[12] I ought to have added Frege, but his writings were unknown to me
when this article was written. [Note added in 1917.]

[13] Professor of Mathematics in the University of Berlin. He died in
1897.

[14] [Note added in 1917.] Although some infinite numbers are greater
than some others, it cannot be proved that of any two infinite numbers
one must be the greater.

[15] Cantor was not guilty of a fallacy on this point. His proof that
there is no greatest number is valid. The solution of the puzzle is
complicated and depends upon the theory of types, which is explained
in _Principia Mathematica_, Vol. I (Camb. Univ. Press, 1910). [Note
added in 1917.]

[16] This must not be regarded as a historically correct account of
what Zeno actually had in mind. It is a new argument for his
conclusion, not the argument which influenced him. On this point, see
e.g. C.D. Broad, "Note on Achilles and the Tortoise," _Mind_, N.S.,
Vol. XXII, pp. 318-19. Much valuable work on the interpretation of
Zeno has been done since this article was written. [Note added in
1917.]

[17] Since the above was written, he has ceased to be used as a
textbook. But I fear many of the books now used are so bad that the
change is no great improvement. [Note added in 1917.]

[18] The greatest age of Greece was brought to an end by the
Peloponnesian War. [Note added in 1917.]




VI

ON SCIENTIFIC METHOD IN PHILOSOPHY


When we try to ascertain the motives which have led men to the
investigation of philosophical questions, we find that, broadly
speaking, they can be divided into two groups, often antagonistic, and
leading to very divergent systems. These two groups of motives are, on
the one hand, those derived from religion and ethics, and, on the
other hand, those derived from science. Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel may
be taken as typical of the philosophers whose interests are mainly
religious and ethical, while Leibniz, Locke, and Hume may be taken as
representatives of the scientific wing. In Aristotle, Descartes,
Berkeley, and Kant we find both groups of motives strongly present.

Herbert Spencer, in whose honour we are assembled to-day, would
naturally be classed among scientific philosophers: it was mainly from
science that he drew his data, his formulation of problems, and his
conception of method. But his strong religious sense is obvious in
much of his writing, and his ethical pre-occupations are what make him
value the conception of evolution--that conception in which, as a
whole generation has believed, science and morals are to be united in
fruitful and indissoluble marriage.

It is my belief that the ethical and religious motives in spite of
the splendidly imaginative systems to which they have given rise, have
been on the whole a hindrance to the progress of philosophy, and ought
now to be consciously thrust aside by those who wish to discover
philosophical truth. Science, originally, was entangled in similar
motives, and was thereby hindered in its advances. It is, I maintain,
from science, rather than from ethics and religion, that philosophy
should draw its inspiration.

But there are two different ways in which a philosophy may seek to
base itself upon science. It may emphasise the most general _results_
of science, and seek to give even greater generality and unity to
these results. Or it may study the _methods_ of science, and seek to
apply these methods, with the necessary adaptations, to its own
peculiar province. Much philosophy inspired by science has gone astray
through preoccupation with the _results_ momentarily supposed to have
been achieved. It is not results, but _methods_ that can be
transferred with profit from the sphere of the special sciences to the
sphere of philosophy. What I wish to bring to your notice is the
possibility and importance of applying to philosophical problems
certain broad principles of method which have been found successful in
the study of scientific questions.

The opposition between a philosophy guided by scientific method and a
philosophy dominated by religious and ethical ideas may be illustrated
by two notions which are very prevalent in the works of philosophers,
namely the notion of _the universe_, and the notion of _good and
evil_. A philosopher is expected to tell us something about the nature
of the universe as a whole, and to give grounds for either optimism or
pessimism. Both these expectations seem to me mistaken. I believe the
conception of "the universe" to be, as its etymology indicates, a
mere relic of pre-Copernican astronomy: and I believe the question of
optimism and pessimism to be one which the philosopher will regard as
outside his scope, except, possibly, to the extent of maintaining that
it is insoluble.

In the days before Copernicus, the conception of the "universe" was
defensible on scientific grounds: the diurnal revolution of the
heavenly bodies bound them together as all parts of one system, of
which the earth was the centre. Round this apparent scientific fact,
many human desires rallied: the wish to believe Man important in the
scheme of things, the theoretical desire for a comprehensive
understanding of the Whole, the hope that the course of nature might
be guided by some sympathy with our wishes. In this way, an ethically
inspired system of metaphysics grew up, whose anthropocentrism was
apparently warranted by the geocentrism of astronomy. When Copernicus
swept away the astronomical basis of this system of thought, it had
grown so familiar, and had associated itself so intimately with men's
aspirations, that it survived with scarcely diminished force--survived
even Kant's "Copernican revolution," and is still now the unconscious
premiss of most metaphysical systems.

The oneness of the world is an almost undiscussed postulate of most
metaphysics. "Reality is not merely one and self-consistent, but is a
system of reciprocally determinate parts"[19]--such a statement would
pass almost unnoticed as a mere truism. Yet I believe that it embodies
a failure to effect thoroughly the "Copernican revolution," and that
the apparent oneness of the world is merely the oneness of what is
seen by a single spectator or apprehended by a single mind. The
Critical Philosophy, although it intended to emphasise the subjective
element in many apparent characteristics of the world, yet, by
regarding the world in itself as unknowable, so concentrated attention
upon the subjective representation that its subjectivity was soon
forgotten. Having recognised the categories as the work of the mind,
it was paralysed by its own recognition, and abandoned in despair the
attempt to undo the work of subjective falsification. In part, no
doubt, its despair was well founded, but not, I think, in any absolute
or ultimate sense. Still less was it a ground for rejoicing, or for
supposing that the nescience to which it ought to have given rise
could be legitimately exchanged for a metaphysical dogmatism.


I

As regards our present question, namely, the question of the unity of
the world, the right method, as I think, has been indicated by William
James.[20] "Let us now turn our backs upon ineffable or unintelligible
ways of accounting for the world's oneness, and inquire whether,
instead of being a principle, the 'oneness' affirmed may not merely be
a name like 'substance' descriptive of the fact that certain _specific
and verifiable connections_ are found among the parts of the
experiential flux.... We can easily conceive of things that shall have
no connection whatever with each other. We may assume them to inhabit
different times and spaces, as the dreams of different persons do even
now. They may be so unlike and incommensurable, and so inert towards
one another, as never to jostle or interfere. Even now there may
actually be whole universes so disparate from ours that we who know
ours have no means of perceiving that they exist. We conceive their
diversity, however; and by that fact the whole lot of them form what
is known in logic as 'a universe of discourse.' To form a universe of
discourse argues, as this example shows, no further kind of connexion.
The importance attached by certain monistic writers to the fact that
any chaos may become a universe by merely being named, is to me
incomprehensible." We are thus left with two kinds of unity in the
experienced world; the one what we may call the epistemological unity,
due merely to the fact that my experienced world is what _one_
experience selects from the sum total of existence: the other that
tentative and partial unity exhibited in the prevalence of scientific
laws in those portions of the world which science has hitherto
mastered. Now a generalisation based upon either of these kinds of
unity would be fallacious. That the things which we experience have
the common property of being experienced by us is a truism from which
obviously nothing of importance can be deducible: it is clearly
fallacious to draw from the fact that whatever we experience is
experienced the conclusion that therefore everything must be
experienced. The generalisation of the second kind of unity, namely,
that derived from scientific laws, would be equally fallacious, though
the fallacy is a trifle less elementary. In order to explain it let us
consider for a moment what is called the reign of law. People often
speak as though it were a remarkable fact that the physical world is
subject to invariable laws. In fact, however, it is not easy to see
how such a world could fail to obey general laws. Taking any arbitrary
set of points in space, there is a function of the time corresponding
to these points, i.e. expressing the motion of a particle which
traverses these points: this function may be regarded as a general law
to which the behaviour of such a particle is subject. Taking all such
functions for all the particles in the universe, there will be
theoretically some one formula embracing them all, and this formula
may be regarded as the single and supreme law of the spatio-temporal
world. Thus what is surprising in physics is not the existence of
general laws, but their extreme simplicity. It is not the uniformity
of nature that should surprise us, for, by sufficient analytic
ingenuity, any conceivable course of nature might be shown to exhibit
uniformity. What should surprise us is the fact that the uniformity is
simple enough for us to be able to discover it. But it is just this
characteristic of simplicity in the laws of nature hitherto discovered
which it would be fallacious to generalise, for it is obvious that
simplicity has been a part cause of their discovery, and can,
therefore, give no ground for the supposition that other undiscovered
laws are equally simple.

The fallacies to which these two kinds of unity have given rise
suggest a caution as regards all use in philosophy of general
_results_ that science is supposed to have achieved. In the first
place, in generalising these results beyond past experience, it is
necessary to examine very carefully whether there is not some reason
making it more probable that these results should hold of all that has
been experienced than that they should hold of things universally. The
sum total of what is experienced by mankind is a selection from the
sum total of what exists, and any general character exhibited by this
selection may be due to the manner of selecting rather than to the
general character of that from which experience selects. In the second
place, the most general results of science are the least certain and
the most liable to be upset by subsequent research. In utilizing these
results as the basis of a philosophy, we sacrifice the most valuable
and remarkable characteristic of scientific method, namely, that,
although almost everything in science is found sooner or later to
require some correction, yet this correction is almost always such as
to leave untouched, or only slightly modified, the greater part of the
results which have been deduced from the premiss subsequently
discovered to be faulty. The prudent man of science acquires a certain
instinct as to the kind of uses which may be made of present
scientific beliefs without incurring the danger of complete and utter
refutation from the modifications likely to be introduced by
subsequent discoveries. Unfortunately the use of scientific
generalisations of a sweeping kind as the basis of philosophy is just
that kind of use which an instinct of scientific caution would avoid,
since, as a rule, it would only lead to true results if the
generalisation upon which it is based stood in _no_ need of
correction.

We may illustrate these general considerations by means of two
examples, namely, the conservation of energy and the principle of
evolution.

(1) Let us begin with the conservation of energy, or, as Herbert
Spencer used to call it, the persistence of force. He says:[21]

  "Before taking a first step in the rational interpretation of
  Evolution, it is needful to recognise, not only the facts that
  Matter is indestructible and Motion continuous, but also the fact
  that Force persists. An attempt to assign the _causes_ of
  Evolution would manifestly be absurd if that agency to which the
  metamorphosis in general and in detail is due, could either come
  into existence or cease to exist. The succession of phenomena
  would in such case be altogether arbitrary, and deductive Science
  impossible."

This paragraph illustrates the kind of way in which the philosopher is
tempted to give an air of absoluteness and necessity to empirical
generalisations, of which only the approximate truth in the regions
hitherto investigated can be guaranteed by the unaided methods of
science. It is very often said that the persistence of something or
other is a necessary presupposition of all scientific investigation,
and this presupposition is then thought to be exemplified in some
quantity which physics declares to be constant. There are here, as it
seems to me, three distinct errors. First, the detailed scientific
investigation of nature does not _presuppose_ any such general laws as
its results are found to verify. Apart from particular observations,
science need presuppose nothing except the general principles of
logic, and these principles are not laws of nature, for they are
merely hypothetical, and apply not only to the actual world but to
whatever is _possible_. The second error consists in the
identification of a constant quantity with a persistent entity. Energy
is a certain function of a physical system, but is not a thing or
substance persisting throughout the changes of the system. The same is
true of mass, in spite of the fact that mass has often been defined as
_quantity of matter_. The whole conception of quantity, involving, as
it does, numerical measurement based largely upon conventions, is far
more artificial, far more an embodiment of mathematical convenience,
than is commonly believed by those who philosophise on physics. Thus
even if (which I cannot for a moment admit) the persistence of some
entity were among the necessary postulates of science, it would be a
sheer error to infer from this the constancy of any physical quantity,
or the _a priori_ necessity of any such constancy which may be
empirically discovered. In the third place, it has become more and
more evident with the progress of physics that large generalisations,
such as the conservation of energy or mass, are far from certain and
are very likely only approximate. Mass, which used to be regarded as
the most indubitable of physical quantities, is now generally believed
to vary according to velocity, and to be, in fact, a vector quantity
which at a given moment is different in different directions. The
detailed conclusions deduced from the supposed constancy of mass for
such motions as used to be studied in physics will remain very nearly
exact, and therefore over the field of the older investigations very
little modification of the older results is required. But as soon as
such a principle as the conservation of mass or of energy is erected
into a universal _a priori_ law, the slightest failure in absolute
exactness is fatal, and the whole philosophic structure raised upon
this foundation is necessarily ruined. The prudent philosopher,
therefore, though he may with advantage study the methods of physics,
will be very chary of basing anything upon what happen at the moment
to be the most general results apparently obtained by those methods.

(2) The philosophy of evolution, which was to be our second example,
illustrates the same tendency to hasty generalisation, and also
another sort, namely, the undue preoccupation with ethical notions.
There are two kinds of evolutionist philosophy, of which both Hegel
and Spencer represent the older and less radical kind, while
Pragmatism and Bergson represent the more modern and revolutionary
variety. But both these sorts of evolutionism have in common the
emphasis on _progress_, that is, upon a continual change from the
worse to the better, or from the simpler to the more complex. It
would be unfair to attribute to Hegel any scientific motive or
foundation, but all the other evolutionists, including Hegel's modern
disciples, have derived their impetus very largely from the history of
biological development. To a philosophy which derives a law of
universal progress from this history there are two objections. First,
that this history itself is concerned with a very small selection of
facts confined to an infinitesimal fragment of space and time, and
even on scientific grounds probably not an average sample of events in
the world at large. For we know that decay as well as growth is a
normal occurrence in the world. An extra-terrestrial philosopher, who
had watched a single youth up to the age of twenty-one and had never
come across any other human being, might conclude that it is the
nature of human beings to grow continually taller and wiser in an
indefinite progress towards perfection; and this generalisation would
be just as well founded as the generalisation which evolutionists base
upon the previous history of this planet. Apart, however, from this
scientific objection to evolutionism, there is another, derived from
the undue admixture of ethical notions in the very idea of progress
from which evolutionism derives its charm. Organic life, we are told,
has developed gradually from the protozoon to the philosopher, and
this development, we are assured, is indubitably an advance.
Unfortunately it is the philosopher, not the protozoon, who gives us
this assurance, and we can have no security that the impartial
outsider would agree with the philosopher's self-complacent
assumption. This point has been illustrated by the philosopher Chuang
Tz in the following instructive anecdote:

  "The Grand Augur, in his ceremonial robes, approached the shambles
  and thus addressed the pigs: 'How can you object to die? I shall
  fatten you for three months. I shall discipline myself for ten
  days and fast for three. I shall strew fine grass, and place you
  bodily upon a carved sacrificial dish. Does not this satisfy you?'

  Then, speaking from the pigs' point of view, he continued: 'It is
  better, perhaps, after all, to live on bran and escape the
  shambles....'

  'But then,' added he, speaking from his own point of view, 'to
  enjoy honour when alive one would readily die on a war-shield or
  in the headsman's basket.'

  So he rejected the pigs' point of view and adopted his own point
  of view. In what sense, then, was he different from the pigs?"

I much fear that the evolutionists too often resemble the Grand Augur
and the pigs.

The ethical element which has been prominent in many of the most
famous systems of philosophy is, in my opinion, one of the most
serious obstacles to the victory of scientific method in the
investigation of philosophical questions. Human ethical notions, as
Chuang Tz perceived, are essentially anthropocentric, and involve,
when used in metaphysics, an attempt, however veiled, to legislate for
the universe on the basis of the present desires of men. In this way
they interfere with that receptivity to fact which is the essence of
the scientific attitude towards the world. To regard ethical notions
as a key to the understanding of the world is essentially
pre-Copernican. It is to make man, with the hopes and ideals which he
happens to have at the present moment, the centre of the universe and
the interpreter of its supposed aims and purposes. Ethical metaphysics
is fundamentally an attempt, however disguised, to give legislative
force to our own wishes. This may, of course, be questioned, but I
think that it is confirmed by a consideration of the way in which
ethical notions arise. Ethics is essentially a product of the
gregarious instinct, that is to say, of the instinct to co-operate
with those who are to form our own group against those who belong to
other groups. Those who belong to our own group are good; those who
belong to hostile groups are wicked. The ends which are pursued by our
own group are desirable ends, the ends pursued by hostile groups are
nefarious. The subjectivity of this situation is not apparent to the
gregarious animal, which feels that the general principles of justice
are on the side of its own herd. When the animal has arrived at the
dignity of the metaphysician, it invents ethics as the embodiment of
its belief in the justice of its own herd. So the Grand Augur invokes
ethics as the justification of Augurs in their conflicts with pigs.
But, it may be said, this view of ethics takes no account of such
truly ethical notions as that of self-sacrifice. This, however, would
be a mistake. The success of gregarious animals in the struggle for
existence depends upon co-operation within the herd, and co-operation
requires sacrifice, to some extent, of what would otherwise be the
interest of the individual. Hence arises a conflict of desires and
instincts, since both self-preservation and the preservation of the
herd are biological ends to the individual. Ethics is in origin the
art of recommending to others the sacrifices required for co-operation
with oneself. Hence, by reflexion, it comes, through the operation of
social justice, to recommend sacrifices by oneself, but all ethics,
however refined, remains more or less subjective. Even vegetarians do
not hesitate, for example, to save the life of a man in a fever,
although in doing so they destroy the lives of many millions of
microbes. The view of the world taken by the philosophy derived from
ethical notions is thus never impartial and therefore never fully
scientific. As compared with science, it fails to achieve the
imaginative liberation from self which is necessary to such
understanding of the world as man can hope to achieve, and the
philosophy which it inspires is always more or less parochial, more or
less infected with the prejudices of a time and a place.

I do not deny the importance or value, within its own sphere, of the
kind of philosophy which is inspired by ethical notions. The ethical
work of Spinoza, for example, appears to me of the very highest
significance, but what is valuable in such work is not any
metaphysical theory as to the nature of the world to which it may give
rise, nor indeed anything which can be proved or disproved by
argument. What is valuable is the indication of some new way of
feeling towards life and the world, some way of feeling by which our
own existence can acquire more of the characteristics which we must
deeply desire. The value of such work, however immeasurable it is,
belongs with practice and not with theory. Such theoretic importance
as it may possess is only in relation to human nature, not in relation
to the world at large. The scientific philosophy, therefore, which
aims only at understanding the world and not directly at any other
improvement of human life, cannot take account of ethical notions
without being turned aside from that submission to fact which is the
essence of the scientific temper.


II

If the notion of the universe and the notion of good and evil are
extruded from scientific philosophy, it may be asked what specific
problems remain for the philosopher as opposed to the man of science?
It would be difficult to give a precise answer to this question, but
certain characteristics may be noted as distinguishing the province of
philosophy from that of the special sciences.

In the first place a philosophical proposition must be general. It
must not deal specially with things on the surface of the earth, or
with the solar system, or with any other portion of space and time. It
is this need of generality which has led to the belief that philosophy
deals with the universe as a whole. I do not believe that this belief
is justified, but I do believe that a philosophical proposition must
be applicable to everything that exists or may exist. It might be
supposed that this admission would be scarcely distinguishable from
the view which I wish to reject. This, however, would be an error, and
an important one. The traditional view would make the universe itself
the subject of various predicates which could not be applied to any
particular thing in the universe, and the ascription of such peculiar
predicates to the universe would be the special business of
philosophy. I maintain, on the contrary, that there are no
propositions of which the "universe" is the subject; in other words,
that there is no such thing as the "universe." What I do maintain is
that there are general propositions which may be asserted of each
individual thing, such as the propositions of logic. This does not
involve that all the things there are form a whole which could be
regarded as another thing and be made the subject of predicates. It
involves only the assertion that there are properties which belong to
each separate thing, not that there are properties belonging to the
whole of things collectively. The philosophy which I wish to advocate
may be called logical atomism or absolute pluralism, because, while
maintaining that there are many things, it denies that there is a
whole composed of those things. We shall see, therefore, that
philosophical propositions, instead of being concerned with the whole
of things collectively, are concerned with all things distributively;
and not only must they be concerned with all things, but they must be
concerned with such properties of all things as do not depend upon the
accidental nature of the things that there happen to be, but are true
of any possible world, independently of such facts as can only be
discovered by our senses.

This brings us to a second characteristic of philosophical
propositions, namely, that they must be _a priori_. A philosophical
proposition must be such as can be neither proved nor disproved by
empirical evidence. Too often we find in philosophical books arguments
based upon the course of history, or the convolutions of the brain, or
the eyes of shell-fish. Special and accidental facts of this kind are
irrelevant to philosophy, which must make only such assertions as
would be equally true however the actual world were constituted.

We may sum up these two characteristics of philosophical propositions
by saying that _philosophy is the science of the possible_. But this
statement unexplained is liable to be misleading, since it may be
thought that the possible is something other than the general, whereas
in fact the two are indistinguishable.

Philosophy, if what has been said is correct, becomes indistinguishable
from logic as that word has now come to be used. The study of logic
consists, broadly speaking, of two not very sharply distinguished
portions. On the one hand it is concerned with those general statements
which can be made concerning everything without mentioning any one
thing or predicate or relation, such for example as "if _x_ is a member
of the class  and every member of  is a member of , then _x_ is a
member of the class , whatever _x_, , and  may be." On the other
hand, it is concerned with the analysis and enumeration of logical
_forms_, i.e. with the kinds of propositions that may occur, with the
various types of facts, and with the classification of the constituents
of facts. In this way logic provides an inventory of possibilities, a
repertory of abstractly tenable hypotheses.

It might be thought that such a study would be too vague and too
general to be of any very great importance, and that, if its problems
became at any point sufficiently definite, they would be merged in the
problems of some special science. It appears, however, that this is
not the case. In some problems, for example, the analysis of space and
time, the nature of perception, or the theory of judgment, the
discovery of the logical form of the facts involved is the hardest
part of the work and the part whose performance has been most lacking
hitherto. It is chiefly for want of the right logical hypothesis that
such problems have hitherto been treated in such an unsatisfactory
manner, and have given rise to those contradictions or antinomies in
which the enemies of reason among philosophers have at all times
delighted.

By concentrating attention upon the investigation of logical forms, it
becomes possible at last for philosophy to deal with its problems
piecemeal, and to obtain, as the sciences do, such partial and
probably not wholly correct results as subsequent investigation can
utilise even while it supplements and improves them. Most
philosophies hitherto have been constructed all in one block, in such
a way that, if they were not wholly correct, they were wholly
incorrect, and could not be used as a basis for further
investigations. It is chiefly owing to this fact that philosophy,
unlike science, has hitherto been unprogressive, because each original
philosopher has had to begin the work again from the beginning,
without being able to accept anything definite from the work of his
predecessors. A scientific philosophy such as I wish to recommend will
be piecemeal and tentative like other sciences; above all, it will be
able to invent hypotheses which, even if they are not wholly true,
will yet remain fruitful after the necessary corrections have been
made. This possibility of successive approximations to the truth is,
more than anything else, the source of the triumphs of science, and to
transfer this possibility to philosophy is to ensure a progress in
method whose importance it would be almost impossible to exaggerate.

The essence of philosophy as thus conceived is analysis, not
synthesis. To build up systems of the world, like Heine's German
professor who knit together fragments of life and made an intelligible
system out of them, is not, I believe, any more feasible than the
discovery of the philosopher's stone. What is feasible is the
understanding of general forms, and the division of traditional
problems into a number of separate and less baffling questions.
"Divide and conquer" is the maxim of success here as elsewhere.

Let us illustrate these somewhat general maxims by examining their
application to the philosophy of space, for it is only in application
that the meaning or importance of a method can be understood. Suppose
we are confronted with the problem of space as presented in Kant's
Transcendental sthetic, and suppose we wish to discover what are the
elements of the problem and what hope there is of obtaining a solution
of them. It will soon appear that three entirely distinct problems,
belonging to different studies, and requiring different methods for
their solution, have been confusedly combined in the supposed single
problem with which Kant is concerned. There is a problem of logic, a
problem of physics, and a problem of theory of knowledge. Of these
three, the problem of logic can be solved exactly and perfectly; the
problem of physics can probably be solved with as great a degree of
certainty and as great an approach to exactness as can be hoped in an
empirical region; the problem of theory of knowledge, however, remains
very obscure and very difficult to deal with. Let us see how these
three problems arise.

(1) The logical problem has arisen through the suggestions of
non-Euclidean geometry. Given a body of geometrical propositions, it
is not difficult to find a minimum statement of the axioms from which
this body of propositions can be deduced. It is also not difficult, by
dropping or altering some of these axioms, to obtain a more general or
a different geometry, having, from the point of view of pure
mathematics, the same logical coherence and the same title to respect
as the more familiar Euclidean geometry. The Euclidean geometry itself
is true perhaps of actual space (though this is doubtful), but
certainly of an infinite number of purely arithmetical systems, each
of which, from the point of view of abstract logic, has an equal and
indefeasible right to be called a Euclidean space. Thus space as an
object of logical or mathematical study loses its uniqueness; not only
are there many kinds of spaces, but there are an infinity of examples
of each kind, though it is difficult to find any kind of which the
space of physics may be an example, and it is impossible to find any
kind of which the space of physics is certainly an example. As an
illustration of one possible logical system of geometry we may
consider all relations of three terms which are analogous in certain
formal respects to the relation "between" as it appears to be in
actual space. A space is then defined by means of one such three-term
relation. The points of the space are all the terms which have this
relation to something or other, and their order in the space in
question is determined by this relation. The points of one space are
necessarily also points of other spaces, since there are necessarily
other three-term relations having those same points for their field.
The space in fact is not determined by the class of its points, but by
the ordering three-term relation. When enough abstract logical
properties of such relations have been enumerated to determine the
resulting kind of geometry, say, for example, Euclidean geometry, it
becomes unnecessary for the pure geometer in his abstract capacity to
distinguish between the various relations which have all these
properties. He considers the whole class of such relations, not any
single one among them. Thus in studying a given kind of geometry the
pure mathematician is studying a certain class of relations defined by
means of certain abstract logical properties which take the place of
what used to be called axioms. The nature of geometrical _reasoning_
therefore is purely deductive and purely logical; if any special
epistemological peculiarities are to be found in geometry, it must not
be in the reasoning, but in our knowledge concerning the axioms in
some given space.

(2) The physical problem of space is both more interesting and more
difficult than the logical problem. The physical problem may be
stated as follows: to find in the physical world, or to construct from
physical materials, a space of one of the kinds enumerated by the
logical treatment of geometry. This problem derives its difficulty
from the attempt to accommodate to the roughness and vagueness of the
real world some system possessing the logical clearness and exactitude
of pure mathematics. That this can be done with a certain degree of
approximation is fairly evident If I see three people _A_, _B_, and
_C_ sitting in a row, I become aware of the fact which may be
expressed by saying that _B_ is between _A_ and _C_ rather than that
_A_ is between _B_ and _C_, or _C_ is between _A_ and _B_. This
relation of "between" which is thus perceived to hold has some of the
abstract logical properties of those three-term relations which, we
saw, give rise to a geometry, but its properties fail to be exact, and
are not, as empirically given, amenable to the kind of treatment at
which geometry aims. In abstract geometry we deal with points,
straight lines, and planes; but the three people _A_, _B_, and _C_
whom I see sitting in a row are not exactly points, nor is the row
exactly a straight line. Nevertheless physics, which formally assumes
a space containing points, straight lines, and planes, is found
empirically to give results applicable to the sensible world. It must
therefore be possible to find an interpretation of the points,
straight lines, and planes of physics in terms of physical data, or at
any rate in terms of data together with such hypothetical additions as
seem least open to question. Since all data suffer from a lack of
mathematical precision through being of a certain size and somewhat
vague in outline, it is plain that if such a notion as that of a point
is to find any application to empirical material, the point must be
neither a datum nor a hypothetical addition to data, but a
_construction_ by means of data with their hypothetical additions. It
is obvious that any hypothetical filling out of data is less dubious
and unsatisfactory when the additions are closely analogous to data
than when they are of a radically different sort. To assume, for
example, that objects which we see continue, after we have turned away
our eyes, to be more or less analogous to what they were while we were
looking, is a less violent assumption than to assume that such objects
are composed of an infinite number of mathematical points. Hence in
the physical study of the geometry of physical space, points must not
be assumed _ab initio_ as they are in the logical treatment of
geometry, but must be constructed as systems composed of data and
hypothetical analogues of data. We are thus led naturally to define a
physical point as a certain class of those objects which are the
ultimate constituents of the physical world. It will be the class of
all those objects which, as one would naturally say, _contain_ the
point. To secure a definition giving this result, without previously
assuming that physical objects are composed of points, is an agreeable
problem in mathematical logic. The solution of this problem and the
perception of its importance are due to my friend Dr. Whitehead. The
oddity of regarding a point as a class of physical entities wears off
with familiarity, and ought in any case not to be felt by those who
maintain, as practically every one does, that points are mathematical
fictions. The word "fiction" is used glibly in such connexions by many
men who seem not to feel the necessity of explaining how it can come
about that a fiction can be so useful in the study of the actual world
as the points of mathematical physics have been found to be. By our
definition, which regards a point as a class of physical objects, it
is explained both how the use of points can lead to important
physical results, and how we can nevertheless avoid the assumption
that points are themselves entities in the physical world.

Many of the mathematically convenient properties of abstract logical
spaces cannot be either known to belong or known not to belong to the
space of physics. Such are all the properties connected with continuity.
For to know that actual space has these properties would require an
infinite exactness of sense-perception. If actual space is continuous,
there are nevertheless many possible non-continuous spaces which will be
empirically indistinguishable from it; and, conversely, actual space may
be non-continuous and yet empirically indistinguishable from a possible
continuous space. Continuity, therefore, though obtainable in the _a
priori_ region of arithmetic, is not with certainty obtainable in the
space or time of the physical world: whether these are continuous or not
would seem to be a question not only unanswered but for ever
unanswerable. From the point of view of philosophy, however, the
discovery that a question is unanswerable is as complete an answer as
any that could possibly be obtained. And from the point of view of
physics, where no empirical means of distinction can be found, there can
be no empirical objection to the mathematically simplest assumption,
which is that of continuity.

The subject of the physical theory of space is a very large one,
hitherto little explored. It is associated with a similar theory of
time, and both have been forced upon the attention of philosophically
minded physicists by the discussions which have raged concerning the
theory of relativity.

(3) The problem with which Kant is concerned in the Transcendental
sthetic is primarily the epistemological problem: "How do we come to
have knowledge of geometry _a priori_?" By the distinction between the
logical and physical problems of geometry, the bearing and scope of
this question are greatly altered. Our knowledge of pure geometry is
_a priori_ but is wholly logical. Our knowledge of physical geometry
is synthetic, but is not _a priori_. Our knowledge of pure geometry is
hypothetical, and does not enable us to assert, for example, that the
axiom of parallels is true in the physical world. Our knowledge of
physical geometry, while it does enable us to assert that this axiom
is approximately verified, does not, owing to the inevitable
inexactitude of observation, enable us to assert that it is verified
_exactly_. Thus, with the separation which we have made between pure
geometry and the geometry of physics, the Kantian problem collapses.
To the question, "How is synthetic _a priori_ knowledge possible?" we
can now reply, at any rate so far as geometry is concerned, "It is not
possible," if "synthetic" means "not deducible from logic alone." Our
knowledge of geometry, like the rest of our knowledge, is derived
partly from logic, partly from sense, and the peculiar position which
in Kant's day geometry appeared to occupy is seen now to be a
delusion. There are still some philosophers, it is true, who maintain
that our knowledge that the axiom of parallels, for example, is true
of actual space, is not to be accounted for empirically, but is as
Kant maintained derived from an _a priori_ intuition. This position is
not logically refutable, but I think it loses all plausibility as soon
as we realise how complicated and derivative is the notion of physical
space. As we have seen, the application of geometry to the physical
world in no way demands that there should really be points and
straight lines among physical entities. The principle of economy,
therefore, demands that we should abstain from assuming the existence
of points and straight lines. As soon, however, as we accept the view
that points and straight lines are complicated constructions by means
of classes of physical entities, the hypothesis that we have an _a
priori_ intuition enabling us to know what happens to straight lines
when they are produced indefinitely becomes extremely strained and
harsh; nor do I think that such an hypothesis would ever have arisen
in the mind of a philosopher who had grasped the nature of physical
space. Kant, under the influence of Newton, adopted, though with some
vacillation, the hypothesis of absolute space, and this hypothesis,
though logically unobjectionable, is removed by Occam's razor, since
absolute space is an unnecessary entity in the explanation of the
physical world. Although, therefore, we cannot refute the Kantian
theory of an _a priori_ intuition, we can remove its grounds one by
one through an analysis of the problem. Thus, here as in many other
philosophical questions, the analytic method, while not capable of
arriving at a demonstrative result, is nevertheless capable of showing
that all the positive grounds in favour of a certain theory are
fallacious and that a less unnatural theory is capable of accounting
for the facts.

Another question by which the capacity of the analytic method can be
shown is the question of realism. Both those who advocate and those
who combat realism seem to me to be far from clear as to the nature of
the problem which they are discussing. If we ask: "Are our objects of
perception _real_ and are they _independent_ of the percipient?" it
must be supposed that we attach some meaning to the words "real" and
"independent," and yet, if either side in the controversy of realism
is asked to define these two words, their answer is pretty sure to
embody confusions such as logical analysis will reveal.

Let us begin with the word "real." There certainly are objects of
perception, and therefore, if the question whether these objects are
real is to be a substantial question, there must be in the world two
sorts of objects, namely, the real and the unreal, and yet the unreal
is supposed to be essentially what there is not. The question what
properties must belong to an object in order to make it real is one to
which an adequate answer is seldom if ever forthcoming. There is of
course the Hegelian answer, that the real is the self-consistent and
that nothing is self-consistent except the Whole; but this answer,
true or false, is not relevant in our present discussion, which moves
on a lower plane and is concerned with the status of objects of
perception among other objects of equal fragmentariness. Objects of
perception are contrasted, in the discussions concerning realism,
rather with psychical states on the one hand and matter on the other
hand than with the all-inclusive whole of things. The question we have
therefore to consider is the question as to what can be meant by
assigning "reality" to some but not all of the entities that make up
the world. Two elements, I think, make up what is felt rather than
thought when the word "reality" is used in this sense. A thing is real
if it persists at times when it is not perceived; or again, a thing is
real when it is correlated with other things in a way which experience
has led us to expect. It will be seen that reality in either of these
senses is by no means necessary to a thing, and that in fact there
might be a whole world in which nothing was real in either of these
senses. It might turn out that the objects of perception failed of
reality in one or both of these respects, without its being in any way
deducible that they are not parts of the external world with which
physics deals. Similar remarks will apply to the word "independent."
Most of the associations of this word are bound up with ideas as to
causation which it is not now possible to maintain. _A_ is independent
of _B_ when _B_ is not an indispensable part of the _cause_ of _A_.
But when it is recognised that causation is nothing more than
correlation, and that there are correlations of simultaneity as well
as of succession, it becomes evident that there is no uniqueness in a
series of casual antecedents of a given event, but that, at any point
where there is a correlation of simultaneity, we can pass from one
line of antecedents to another in order to obtain a new series of
causal antecedents. It will be necessary to specify the causal law
according to which the antecedents are to be considered. I received a
letter the other day from a correspondent who had been puzzled by
various philosophical questions. After enumerating them he says:
"These questions led me from Bonn to Strassburg, where I found
Professor Simmel." Now, it would be absurd to deny that these
questions caused his body to move from Bonn to Strassburg, and yet it
must be supposed that a set of purely mechanical antecedents could
also be found which would account for this transfer of matter from one
place to another. Owing to this plurality of causal series antecedent
to a given event, the notion of _the_ cause becomes indefinite, and
the question of independence becomes correspondingly ambiguous. Thus,
instead of asking simply whether _A_ is independent of _B_, we ought
to ask whether there is a series determined by such and such causal
laws leading from _B_ to _A_. This point is important in connexion
with the particular question of objects of perception. It may be that
no objects quite like those which we perceive ever exist unperceived;
in this case there will be a causal law according to which objects of
perception are not independent of being perceived. But even if this be
the case, it may nevertheless also happen that there are purely
physical causal laws determining the occurrence of objects which are
perceived by means of other objects which perhaps are not perceived.
In that case, in regard to such causal laws objects of perception will
be independent of being perceived. Thus the question whether objects
of perception are independent of being perceived is, as it stands,
indeterminate, and the answer will be yes or no according to the
method adopted of making it determinate. I believe that this confusion
has borne a very large part in prolonging the controversies on this
subject, which might well have seemed capable of remaining for ever
undecided. The view which I should wish to advocate is that objects of
perception do not persist unchanged at times when they are not
perceived, although probably objects more or less resembling them do
exist at such times; that objects of perception are part, and the only
empirically knowable part, of the actual subject-matter of physics,
and are themselves properly to be called physical; that purely
physical laws exist determining the character and duration of objects
of perception without any reference to the fact that they are
perceived; and that in the establishment of such laws the propositions
of physics do not presuppose any propositions of psychology or even
the existence of mind. I do not know whether realists would recognise
such a view as realism. All that I should claim for it is, that it
avoids difficulties which seem to me to beset both realism and
idealism as hitherto advocated, and that it avoids the appeal which
they have made to ideas which logical analysis shows to be ambiguous.
A further defence and elaboration of the positions which I advocate,
but for which time is lacking now, will be found indicated in my book
on _Our Knowledge of the External World_.[22]

The adoption of scientific method in philosophy, if I am not mistaken,
compels us to abandon the hope of solving many of the more ambitious
and humanly interesting problems of traditional philosophy. Some of
these it relegates, though with little expectation of a successful
solution, to special sciences, others it shows to be such as our
capacities are essentially incapable of solving. But there remain a
large number of the recognised problems of philosophy in regard to
which the method advocated gives all those advantages of division into
distinct questions, of tentative, partial, and progressive advance,
and of appeal to principles with which, independently of temperament,
all competent students must agree. The failure of philosophy hitherto
has been due in the main to haste and ambition: patience and modesty,
here as in other sciences, will open the road to solid and durable
progress.

FOOTNOTES:

[19] Bosanquet, _Logic_, ii, p. 211.

[20] _Some Problems of Philosophy_, p 124.

[21] _First Principles_ (1862), Part II, beginning of chap. viii.

[22] Open Court Company, 1914.




VII

THE ULTIMATE CONSTITUENTS OF MATTER[23]


I wish to discuss in this article no less a question than the ancient
metaphysical query, "What is matter?" The question, "What is matter?"
in so far as it concerns philosophy, is, I think, already capable of
an answer which in principle will be as complete as an answer can hope
to be; that is to say, we can separate the problem into an essentially
soluble and an essentially insoluble portion, and we can now see how
to solve the essentially soluble portion, at least as regards its main
outlines. It is these outlines which I wish to suggest in the present
article. My main position, which is realistic, is, I hope and believe,
not remote from that of Professor Alexander, by whose writings on this
subject I have profited greatly.[24] It is also in close accord with
that of Dr. Nunn.[25]

Common sense is accustomed to the division of the world into mind and
matter. It is supposed by all who have never studied philosophy that
the distinction between mind and matter is perfectly clear and easy,
that the two do not at any point overlap, and that only a fool or a
philosopher could be in doubt as to whether any given entity is mental
or material. This simple faith survives in Descartes and in a
somewhat modified form in Spinoza, but with Leibniz it begins to
disappear, and from his day to our own almost every philosopher of
note has criticised and rejected the dualism of common sense. It is my
intention in this article to defend this dualism; but before defending
it we must spend a few moments on the reasons which have prompted its
rejection.

Our knowledge of the material world is obtained by means of the
senses, of sight and touch and so on. At first it is supposed that
things are just as they seem, but two opposite sophistications soon
destroy this nave belief. On the one hand the physicists cut up
matter into molecules, atoms, corpuscles, and as many more such
subdivisions as their future needs may make them postulate, and the
units at which they arrive are uncommonly different from the visible,
tangible objects of daily life. A unit of matter tends more and more
to be something like an electromagnetic field filling all space,
though having its greatest intensity in a small region. Matter
consisting of such elements is as remote from daily life as any
metaphysical theory. It differs from the theories of metaphysicians
only in the fact that its practical efficacy proves that it contains
some measure of truth and induces business men to invest money on the
strength of it; but, in spite of its connection with the money market,
it remains a metaphysical theory none the less.

The second kind of sophistication to which the world of common sense
has been subjected is derived from the psychologists and
physiologists. The physiologists point out that what we see depends
upon the eye, that what we hear depends upon the ear, and that all our
senses are liable to be affected by anything which affects the brain,
like alcohol or hasheesh. Psychologists point out how much of what we
think we see is supplied by association or unconscious inference, how
much is mental interpretation, and how doubtful is the residuum which
can be regarded as crude datum. From these facts it is argued by the
psychologists that the notion of a datum passively received by the
mind is a delusion, and it is argued by the physiologists that even if
a pure datum of sense could be obtained by the analysis of experience,
still this datum could not belong, as common sense supposes, to the
outer world, since its whole nature is conditioned by our nerves and
sense organs, changing as they change in ways which it is thought
impossible to connect with any change in the matter supposed to be
perceived. This physiologist's argument is exposed to the rejoinder,
more specious than solid, that our knowledge of the existence of the
sense organs and nerves is obtained by that very process which the
physiologist has been engaged in discrediting, since the existence of
the nerves and sense organs is only known through the evidence of the
senses themselves. This argument may prove that some reinterpretation
of the results of physiology is necessary before they can acquire
metaphysical validity. But it does not upset the physiological
argument in so far as this constitutes merely a _reductio ad absurdum_
of nave realism.

These various lines of argument prove, I think, that some part of the
beliefs of common sense must be abandoned. They prove that, if we take
these beliefs as a whole, we are forced into conclusions which are in
part self-contradictory; but such arguments cannot of themselves
decide what portion of our common-sense beliefs is in need of
correction. Common sense believes that what we see is physical,
outside the mind, and continuing to exist if we shut our eyes or turn
them in another direction. I believe that common sense is right in
regarding what we see as physical and (in one of several possible
senses) outside the mind, but is probably wrong in supposing that it
continues to exist when we are no longer looking at it. It seems to me
that the whole discussion of matter has been obscured by two errors
which support each other. The first of these is the error that what we
see, or perceive through any of our other senses, is subjective: the
second is the belief that what is physical must be persistent.
Whatever physics may regard as the ultimate constituents of matter, it
always supposes these constituents to be indestructible. Since the
immediate data of sense are not indestructible but in a state of
perpetual flux, it is argued that these data themselves cannot be
among the ultimate constituents of matter. I believe this to be a
sheer mistake. The persistent particles of mathematical physics I
regard as logical constructions, symbolic fictions enabling us to
express compendiously very complicated assemblages of facts; and, on
the other hand, I believe that the actual data in sensation, the
immediate objects of sight or touch or hearing, are extra-mental,
purely physical, and among the ultimate constituents of matter.

My meaning in regard to the impermanence of physical entities may
perhaps be made clearer by the use of Bergson's favourite illustration
of the cinematograph. When I first read Bergson's statement that the
mathematician conceives the world after the analogy of a
cinematograph, I had never seen a cinematograph, and my first visit to
one was determined by the desire to verify Bergson's statement, which
I found to be completely true, at least so far as I am concerned.
When, in a picture palace, we see a man rolling down hill, or running
away from the police, or falling into a river, or doing any of those
other things to which men in such places are addicted, we know that
there is not really only one man moving, but a succession of films,
each with a different momentary man. The illusion of persistence
arises only through the approach to continuity in the series of
momentary men. Now what I wish to suggest is that in this respect the
cinema is a better metaphysician than common sense, physics, or
philosophy. The real man too, I believe, however the police may swear
to his identity, is really a series of momentary men, each different
one from the other, and bound together, not by a numerical identity,
but by continuity and certain intrinsic causal laws. And what applies
to men applies equally to tables and chairs, the sun, moon and stars.
Each of these is to be regarded, not as one single persistent entity,
but as a series of entities succeeding each other in time, each
lasting for a very brief period, though probably not for a mere
mathematical instant. In saying this I am only urging the same kind of
division in time as we are accustomed to acknowledge in the case of
space. A body which fills a cubic foot will be admitted to consist of
many smaller bodies, each occupying only a very tiny volume; similarly
a thing which persists for an hour is to be regarded as composed of
many things of less duration. A true theory of matter requires a
division of things into time-corpuscles as well as into
space-corpuscles.

The world may be conceived as consisting of a multitude of entities
arranged in a certain pattern. The entities which are arranged I shall
call "particulars." The arrangement or pattern results from relations
among particulars. Classes or series of particulars, collected
together on account of some property which makes it convenient to be
able to speak of them as wholes, are what I call logical constructions
or symbolic fictions. The particulars are to be conceived, not on the
analogy of bricks in a building, but rather on the analogy of notes
in a symphony. The ultimate constituents of a symphony (apart from
relations) are the notes, each of which lasts only for a very short
time. We may collect together all the notes played by one instrument:
these may be regarded as the analogues of the successive particulars
which common sense would regard as successive states of one "thing."
But the "thing" ought to be regarded as no more "real" or
"substantial" than, for example, the rle of the trombone. As soon as
"things" are conceived in this manner it will be found that the
difficulties in the way of regarding immediate objects of sense as
physical have largely disappeared.

When people ask, "Is the object of sense mental or physical?" they
seldom have any clear idea either what is meant by "mental" or
"physical," or what criteria are to be applied for deciding whether a
given entity belongs to one class or the other. I do not know how to
give a sharp definition of the word "mental," but something may be
done by enumerating occurrences which are indubitably mental:
believing, doubting, wishing, willing, being pleased or pained, are
certainly mental occurrences; so are what we may call experiences,
seeing, hearing, smelling, perceiving generally. But it does not
follow from this that what is seen, what is heard, what is smelt, what
is perceived, must be mental. When I see a flash of lightning, my
seeing of it is mental, but what I see, although it is not quite the
same as what anybody else sees at the same moment, and although it
seems very unlike what the physicist would describe as a flash of
lightning, is not mental. I maintain, in fact, that if the physicist
could describe truly and fully all that occurs in the physical world
when there is a flash of lightning, it would contain as a constituent
what I see, and also what is seen by anybody else who would commonly
be said to see the same flash. What I mean may perhaps be made plainer
by saying that if my body could remain in exactly the same state in
which it is, although my mind had ceased to exist, precisely that
object which I now see when I see the flash would exist, although of
course I should not see it, since my seeing is mental. The principal
reasons which have led people to reject this view have, I think, been
two: first, that they did not adequately distinguish between my seeing
and what I see; secondly, that the causal dependence of what I see
upon my body has made people suppose that what I see cannot be
"outside" me. The first of these reasons need not detain us, since the
confusion only needs to be pointed out in order to be obviated; but
the second requires some discussion, since it can only be answered by
removing current misconceptions, on the one hand as to the nature of
space, and on the other, as to the meaning of causal dependence.

When people ask whether colours, for example, or other secondary
qualities are inside or outside the mind, they seem to suppose that
their meaning must be clear, and that it ought to be possible to say
yes or no without any further discussion of the terms involved. In
fact, however, such terms as "inside" or "outside" are very ambiguous.
What is meant by asking whether this or that is "in" the mind? The
mind is not like a bag or a pie; it does not occupy a certain region
in space, or, if (in a sense) it does, what is in that region is
presumably part of the brain, which would not be said to be in the
mind. When people say that sensible qualities are in the mind, they do
not mean "spatially contained in" in the sense in which the blackbirds
were in the pie. We might regard the mind as an assemblage of
particulars, namely, what would be called "states of mind," which
would belong together in virtue of some specific common quality. The
common quality of all states of mind would be the quality designated
by the word "mental"; and besides this we should have to suppose that
each separate person's states of mind have some common characteristic
distinguishing them from the states of mind of other people. Ignoring
this latter point, let us ask ourselves whether the quality designated
by the word "mental" does, as a matter of observation, actually belong
to objects of sense, such as colours or noises. I think any candid
person must reply that, however difficult it may be to know what we
mean by "mental," it is not difficult to see that colours and noises
are not mental in the sense of having that intrinsic peculiarity which
belongs to beliefs and wishes and volitions, but not to the physical
world. Berkeley advances on this subject a plausible argument[26]
which seems to me to rest upon an ambiguity in the word "pain." He
argues that the realist supposes the heat which he feels in
approaching a fire to be something outside his mind, but that as he
approaches nearer and nearer to the fire the sensation of heat passes
imperceptibly into pain, and that no one could regard pain as
something outside the mind. In reply to this argument, it should be
observed in the first place that the heat of which we are immediately
aware is not in the fire but in our own body. It is only by inference
that the fire is judged to be the cause of the heat which we feel in
our body. In the second place (and this is the more important point),
when we speak of pain we may mean one of two things: we may mean the
object of the sensation or other experience which has the quality of
being painful, or we may mean the quality of painfulness itself. When
a man says he has a pain in his great toe, what he means is that he
has a sensation associated with his great toe and having the quality
of painfulness. The sensation itself, like every sensation, consists
in experiencing a sensible object, and the experiencing has that
quality of painfulness which only mental occurrences can have, but
which may belong to thoughts or desires, as well as to sensations. But
in common language we speak of the sensible object experienced in a
painful sensation as a pain, and it is this way of speaking which
causes the confusion upon which the plausibility of Berkeley's
argument depends. It would be absurd to attribute the quality of
painfulness to anything non-mental, and hence it comes to be thought
that what we call a pain in the toe must be mental. In fact, however,
it is not the sensible object in such a case which is painful, but the
sensation, that is to say, the experience of the sensible object. As
the heat which we experience from the fire grows greater, the
experience passes gradually from being pleasant to being painful, but
neither the pleasure nor the pain is a quality of the object
experienced as opposed to the experience, and it is therefore a
fallacy to argue that this object must be mental on the ground that
painfulness can only be attributed to what is mental.

If, then, when we say that something is in the mind we mean that it
has a certain recognisable intrinsic characteristic such as belongs to
thoughts and desires, it must be maintained on grounds of immediate
inspection that objects of sense are not in any mind.

A different meaning of "in the mind" is, however, to be inferred from
the arguments advanced by those who regard sensible objects as being
in the mind. The arguments used are, in the main, such as would prove
the causal dependence of objects of sense upon the percipient. Now
the notion of causal dependence is very obscure and difficult, much
more so in fact than is generally realised by philosophers. I shall
return to this point in a moment. For the present, however, accepting
the notion of causal dependence without criticism, I wish to urge that
the dependence in question is rather upon our bodies than upon our
minds. The visual appearance of an object is altered if we shut one
eye, or squint, or look previously at something dazzling; but all
these are bodily acts, and the alterations which they effect are to be
explained by physiology and optics, not by psychology.[27] They are in
fact of exactly the same kind as the alterations effected by
spectacles or a microscope. They belong therefore to the theory of the
physical world, and can have no bearing upon the question whether what
we see is causally dependent upon the mind. What they do tend to
prove, and what I for my part have no wish to deny, is that what we
see is causally dependent upon our body and is not, as crude common
sense would suppose, something which would exist equally if our eyes
and nerves and brain were absent, any more than the visual appearance
presented by an object seen through a microscope would remain if the
microscope were removed. So long as it is supposed that the physical
world is composed of stable and more or less permanent constituents,
the fact that what we see is changed by changes in our body appears to
afford reason for regarding what we see as not an ultimate constituent
of matter. But if it is recognised that the ultimate constituents of
matter are as circumscribed in duration as in spatial extent, the
whole of this difficulty vanishes.

There remains, however, another difficulty, connected with space. When
we look at the sun we wish to know something about the sun itself,
which is ninety-three million miles away; but what we see is dependent
upon our eyes, and it is difficult to suppose that our eyes can affect
what happens at a distance of ninety-three million miles. Physics
tells us that certain electromagnetic waves start from the sun, and
reach our eyes after about eight minutes. They there produce
disturbances in the rods and cones, thence in the optic nerve, thence
in the brain. At the end of this purely physical series, by some odd
miracle, comes the experience which we call "seeing the sun," and it
is such experiences which form the whole and sole reason for our
belief in the optic nerve, the rods and cones, the ninety-three
million miles, the electromagnetic waves, and the sun itself. It is
this curious oppositeness of direction between the order of causation
as affirmed by physics, and the order of evidence as revealed by
theory of knowledge, that causes the most serious perplexities in
regard to the nature of physical reality. Anything that invalidates
our seeing, as a source of knowledge concerning physical reality,
invalidates also the whole of physics and physiology. And yet,
starting from a common-sense acceptance of our seeing, physics has
been led step by step to the construction of the causal chain in which
our seeing is the last link, and the immediate object which we see
cannot be regarded as that initial cause which we believe to be
ninety-three million miles away, and which we are inclined to regard
as the "real" sun.

I have stated this difficulty as forcibly as I can, because I believe
that it can only be answered by a radical analysis and reconstruction
of all the conceptions upon whose employment it depends.

Space, time, matter and cause, are the chief of these conceptions. Let
us begin with the conception of cause.

Causal dependence, as I observed a moment ago, is a conception which
it is very dangerous to accept at its face value. There exists a
notion that in regard to any event there is something which may be
called _the_ cause of that event--some one definite occurrence,
without which the event would have been impossible and with which it
becomes necessary. An event is supposed to be dependent upon its cause
in some way which in it is not dependent upon other things. Thus men
will urge that the mind is dependent upon the brain, or, with equal
plausibility, that the brain is dependent upon the mind. It seems not
improbable that if we had sufficient knowledge we could infer the
state of a man's mind from the state of his brain, or the state of his
brain from the state of his mind. So long as the usual conception of
causal dependence is retained, this state of affairs can be used by
the materialist to urge that the state of our brain causes our
thoughts, and by the idealist to urge that our thoughts cause the
state of our brain. Either contention is equally valid or equally
invalid. The fact seems to be that there are many correlations of the
sort which may be called causal, and that, for example, either a
physical or a mental event can be predicted, theoretically, either
from a sufficient number of physical antecedents or from a sufficient
number of mental antecedents. To speak of _the_ cause of an event is
therefore misleading. Any set of antecedents from which the event can
theoretically be inferred by means of correlations might be called a
cause of the event. But to speak of _the_ cause is to imply a
uniqueness which does not exist.

The relevance of this to the experience which we call "seeing the sun"
is obvious. The fact that there exists a chain of antecedents which
makes our seeing dependent upon the eyes and nerves and brain does not
even tend to show that there is not another chain of antecedents in
which the eyes and nerves and brain as physical things are ignored. If
we are to escape from the dilemma which seemed to arise out of the
physiological causation of what we see when we say we see the sun, we
must find, at least in theory, a way of stating causal laws for the
physical world, in which the units are not material things, such as
the eyes and nerves and brain, but momentary particulars of the same
sort as our momentary visual object when we look at the sun. The sun
itself and the eyes and nerves and brain must be regarded as
assemblages of momentary particulars. Instead of supposing, as we
naturally do when we start from an uncritical acceptance of the
apparent dicta of physics, that _matter_ is what is "really real" in
the physical world, and that the immediate objects of sense are mere
phantasms, we must regard matter as a logical construction, of which
the constituents will be just such evanescent particulars as may, when
an observer happens to be present, become data of sense to that
observer. What physics regards as the sun of eight minutes ago will be
a whole assemblage of particulars, existing at different times,
spreading out from a centre with the velocity of light, and containing
among their number all those visual data which are seen by people who
are now looking at the sun. Thus the sun of eight minutes ago is a
class of particulars, and what I see when I now look at the sun is one
member of this class. The various particulars constituting this class
will be correlated with each other by a certain continuity and certain
intrinsic laws of variation as we pass outwards from the centre,
together with certain modifications correlated extrinsically with
other particulars which are not members of this class. It is these
extrinsic modifications which represent the sort of facts that, in our
former account, appeared as the influence of the eyes and nerves in
modifying the appearance of the sun.[28]

The _prima facie_ difficulties in the way of this view are chiefly
derived from an unduly conventional theory of space. It might seem at
first sight as if we had packed the world much fuller than it could
possibly hold. At every place between us and the sun, we said, there
is to be a particular which is to be a member of the sun as it was a
few minutes ago. There will also, of course, have to be a particular
which is a member of any planet or fixed star that may happen to be
visible from that place. At the place where I am, there will be
particulars which will be members severally of all the "things" I am
now said to be perceiving. Thus throughout the world, everywhere,
there will be an enormous number of particulars coexisting in the same
place. But these troubles result from contenting ourselves too readily
with the merely three-dimensional space to which schoolmasters have
accustomed us. The space of the real world is a space of six
dimensions, and as soon as we realise this we see that there is plenty
of room for all the particulars for which we want to find positions.
In order to realise this we have only to return for a moment from the
polished space of physics to the rough and untidy space of our
immediate sensible experience. The space of one man's sensible objects
is a three-dimensional space. It does not appear probable that two men
ever both perceive at the same time any one sensible object; when they
are said to see the same thing or hear the same noise, there will
always be some difference, however slight, between the actual shapes
seen or the actual sounds heard. If this is so, and if, as is
generally assumed, position in space is purely relative, it follows
that the space of one man's objects and the space of another man's
objects have no place in common, that they are in fact different
spaces, and not merely different parts of one space. I mean by this
that such immediate spatial relations as are perceived to hold
between the different parts of the sensible space perceived by one
man, do not hold between parts of sensible spaces perceived by
different men. There are therefore a multitude of three-dimensional
spaces in the world: there are all those perceived by observers, and
presumably also those which are not perceived, merely because no
observer is suitably situated for perceiving them.

But although these spaces do not have to one another the same kind of
spatial relations as obtain between the parts of one of them, it is
nevertheless possible to arrange these spaces themselves in a
three-dimensional order. This is done by means of the correlated
particulars which we regard as members (or aspects) of one physical
thing. When a number of people are said to see the same object, those
who would be said to be near to the object see a particular occupying
a larger part of their field of vision than is occupied by the
corresponding particular seen by people who would be said to be
farther from the thing. By means of such considerations it is
possible, in ways which need not now be further specified, to arrange
all the different spaces in a three-dimensional series. Since each of
the spaces is itself three-dimensional, the whole world of particulars
is thus arranged in a six-dimensional space, that is to say, six
co-ordinates will be required to assign completely the position of any
given particular, namely, three to assign its position in its own
space and three more to assign the position of its space among the
other spaces.

There are two ways of classifying particulars: we may take together
all those that belong to a given "perspective," or all those that are,
as common sense would say, different "aspects" of the same "thing."
For example, if I am (as is said) seeing the sun, what I see belongs
to two assemblages: (1) the assemblage of all my present objects of
sense, which is what I call a "perspective"; (2) the assemblage of
all the different particulars which would be called aspects of the sun
of eight minutes ago--this assemblage is what I define as _being_ the
sun of eight minutes ago. Thus "perspectives" and "things" are merely
two different ways of classifying particulars. It is to be observed
that there is no _a priori_ necessity for particulars to be
susceptible of this double classification. There may be what might be
called "wild" particulars, not having the usual relations by which the
classification is effected; perhaps dreams and hallucinations are
composed of particulars which are "wild" in this sense.

The exact definition of what is meant by a perspective is not quite
easy. So long as we confine ourselves to visible objects or to objects
of touch we might define the perspective of a given particular as "all
particulars which have a simple (direct) spatial relation to the given
particular." Between two patches of colour which I see now, there is a
direct spatial relation which I equally see. But between patches of
colour seen by different men there is only an indirect constructed
spatial relation by means of the placing of "things" in physical space
(which is the same as the space composed of perspectives). Those
particulars which have direct spatial relations to a given particular
will belong to the same perspective. But if, for example, the sounds
which I hear are to belong to the same perspective with the patches of
colour which I see, there must be particulars which have no direct
spatial relation and yet belong to the same perspective. We cannot
define a perspective as all the data of one percipient at one time,
because we wish to allow the possibility of perspectives which are not
perceived by any one. There will be need, therefore, in defining a
perspective, of some principle derived neither from psychology nor
from space.

Such a principle may be obtained from the consideration of _time_.
The one all-embracing time, like the one all-embracing space, is a
construction; there is no _direct_ time-relation between particulars
belonging to my perspective and particulars belonging to another
man's. On the other hand, any two particulars of which I am aware are
either simultaneous or successive, and their simultaneity or
successiveness is sometimes itself a datum to me. We may therefore
define the perspective to which a given particular belongs as "all
particulars simultaneous with the given particular," where
"simultaneous" is to be understood as a direct simple relation, not
the derivative constructed relation of physics. It may be observed
that the introduction of "local time" suggested by the principle of
relativity has effected, for purely scientific reasons, much the same
multiplication of times as we have just been advocating.

The sum-total of all the particulars that are (directly) either
simultaneous with or before or after a given particular may be defined
as the "biography" to which that particular belongs. It will be
observed that, just as a perspective need not be actually perceived by
any one, so a biography need not be actually lived by any one. Those
biographies that are lived by no one are called "official."

The definition of a "thing" is effected by means of continuity and of
correlations which have a certain differential independence of other
"things." That is to say, given a particular in one perspective, there
will usually in a neighbouring perspective be a very similar
particular, differing from the given particular, to the first order of
small quantities, according to a law involving only the difference of
position of the two perspectives in perspective space, and not any of
the other "things" in the universe. It is this continuity and
differential independence in the law of change as we pass from one
perspective to another that defines the class of particulars which is
to be called "one thing."

Broadly speaking, we may say that the physicist finds it convenient to
classify particulars into "things," while the psychologist finds it
convenient to classify them into "perspectives" and "biographies,"
since one perspective _may_ constitute the momentary data of one
percipient, and one biography _may_ constitute the whole of the data
of one percipient throughout his life.

We may now sum up our discussion. Our object has been to discover as
far as possible the nature of the ultimate constituents of the
physical world. When I speak of the "physical world," I mean, to begin
with, the world dealt with by physics. It is obvious that physics is
an empirical science, giving us a certain amount of knowledge and
based upon evidence obtained through the senses. But partly through
the development of physics itself, partly through arguments derived
from physiology, psychology or metaphysics, it has come to be thought
that the immediate data of sense could not themselves form part of the
ultimate constituents of the physical world, but were in some sense
"mental," "in the mind," or "subjective." The grounds for this view,
in so far as they depend upon physics, can only be adequately dealt
with by rather elaborate constructions depending upon symbolic logic,
showing that out of such materials as are provided by the senses it is
possible to construct classes and series having the properties which
physics assigns to matter. Since this argument is difficult and
technical, I have not embarked upon it in this article. But in so far
as the view that sense-data are "mental" rests upon physiology,
psychology, or metaphysics, I have tried to show that it rests upon
confusions and prejudices--prejudices in favour of permanence in the
ultimate constituents of matter, and confusions derived from unduly
simple notions as to space, from the causal correlation of sense-data
with sense-organs, and from failure to distinguish between sense-data
and sensations. If what we have said on these subjects is valid, the
existence of sense-data is logically independent of the existence of
mind, and is causally dependent upon the _body_ of the percipient
rather than upon his mind. The causal dependence upon the body of the
percipient, we found, is a more complicated matter than it appears to
be, and, like all causal dependence, is apt to give rise to erroneous
beliefs through misconceptions as to the nature of causal correlation.
If we have been right in our contentions, sense-data are merely those
among the ultimate constituents of the physical world, of which we
happen to be immediately aware; they themselves are purely physical,
and all that is mental in connection with them is our awareness of
them, which is irrelevant to their nature and to their place in
physics.

Unduly simple notions as to space have been a great stumbling-block to
realists. When two men look at the same table, it is supposed that
what the one sees and what the other sees are in the same place. Since
the shape and colour are not quite the same for the two men, this
raises a difficulty, hastily solved, or rather covered up, by
declaring what each sees to be purely "subjective"--though it would
puzzle those who use this glib word to say what they mean by it. The
truth seems to be that space--and time also--is much more complicated
than it would appear to be from the finished structure of physics, and
that the one all-embracing three-dimensional space is a logical
construction, obtained by means of correlations from a crude space of
six dimensions. The particulars occupying this six-dimensional space,
classified in one way, form "things," from which with certain further
manipulations we can obtain what physics can regard as matter;
classified in another way, they form "perspectives" and "biographies,"
which may, if a suitable percipient happens to exist, form
respectively the sense-data of a momentary or of a total experience.
It is only when physical "things" have been dissected into series of
classes of particulars, as we have done, that the conflict between the
point of view of physics and the point of view of psychology can be
overcome. This conflict, if what has been said is not mistaken, flows
from different methods of classification, and vanishes as soon as its
source is discovered.

In favour of the theory which I have briefly outlined, I do not claim
that it is _certainly_ true. Apart from the likelihood of mistakes,
much of it is avowedly hypothetical. What I do claim for the theory is
that it _may_ be true, and that this is more than can be said for any
other theory except the closely analogous theory of Leibniz. The
difficulties besetting realism, the confusions obstructing any
philosophical account of physics, the dilemma resulting from
discrediting sense-data, which yet remain the sole source of our
knowledge of the outer world--all these are avoided by the theory
which I advocate. This does not prove the theory to be true, since
probably many other theories might be invented which would have the
same merits. But it does prove that the theory has a better chance of
being true than any of its present competitors, and it suggests that
what can be known with certainty is likely to be discoverable by
taking our theory as a starting-point, and gradually freeing it from
all such assumptions as seem irrelevant, unnecessary, or unfounded. On
these grounds, I recommend it to attention as a hypothesis and a basis
for further work, though not as itself a finished or adequate solution
of the problem with which it deals.

FOOTNOTES:

[23] An address delivered to the Philosophical Society of Manchester
in February, 1915. Reprinted from _The Monist_, July, 1915.

[24] Cf. especially Samuel Alexander, "The Basis of Realism," _British
Academy_, Vol. VI.

[25] "Are Secondary Qualities Independent of Perception?" _Proc.
Arist. Soc._, 1909-10, pp. 191-218.

[26] First dialogue between Hylas and Philonous, _Works_ (Fraser's
edition 1901). I. p. 384.

[27] This point has been well urged by the American realists.

[28] Cf. T.P. Nunn, "Are Secondary Qualities Independent of
Perception?" _Proc. Arist. Soc._, 1909-1910.




VIII

THE RELATION OF SENSE-DATA TO PHYSICS


I. THE PROBLEM STATED

Physics is said to be an empirical science, based upon observation and
experiment.

It is supposed to be verifiable, i.e. capable of calculating
beforehand results subsequently confirmed by observation and
experiment.

What can we learn by observation and experiment?

Nothing, so far as physics is concerned, except immediate data of
sense: certain patches of colour, sounds, tastes, smells, etc., with
certain spatio-temporal relations.

The supposed contents of the physical world are _prima facie_ very
different from these: molecules have no colour, atoms make no noise,
electrons have no taste, and corpuscles do not even smell.

If such objects are to be verified, it must be solely through their
relation to sense-data: they must have some kind of correlation with
sense-data, and must be verifiable through their correlation _alone_.

But how is the correlation itself ascertained? A correlation can only
be ascertained empirically by the correlated objects being constantly
_found_ together. But in our case, only one term of the correlation,
namely, the sensible term, is ever _found_: the other term seems
essentially incapable of being found. Therefore, it would seem, the
correlation with objects of sense, by which physics was to be
verified, is itself utterly and for ever unverifiable.

There are two ways of avoiding this result.

(1) We may say that we know some principle _a priori_, without the
need of empirical verification, e.g. that our sense-data have _causes_
other than themselves, and that something can be known about these
causes by inference from their effects. This way has been often
adopted by philosophers. It may be necessary to adopt this way to some
extent, but in so far as it is adopted physics ceases to be empirical
or based upon experiment and observation alone. Therefore this way is
to be avoided as much as possible.

(2) We may succeed in actually defining the objects of physics as
functions of sense-data. Just in so far as physics leads to
expectations, this _must_ be possible, since we can only _expect_ what
can be experienced. And in so far as the physical state of affairs is
inferred from sense-data, it must be capable of expression as a
function of sense-data. The problem of accomplishing this expression
leads to much interesting logico-mathematical work.

In physics as commonly set forth, sense-data appear as functions of
physical objects: when such-and-such waves impinge upon the eye, we
see such-and-such colours, and so on. But the waves are in fact
inferred from the colours, not vice versa. Physics cannot be regarded
as validly based upon empirical data until the waves have been
expressed as functions of the colours and other sense-data.

Thus if physics is to be verifiable we are faced with the following
problem: Physics exhibits sense-data as functions of physical objects,
but verification is only possible if physical objects can be exhibited
as functions of sense-data. We have therefore to solve the equations
giving sense-data in terms of physical objects, so as to make them
instead give physical objects in terms of sense-data.


II. CHARACTERISTICS OF SENSE-DATA

When I speak of a "sense-datum," I do not mean the whole of what is
given in sense at one time. I mean rather such a part of the whole as
might be singled out by attention: particular patches of colour,
particular noises, and so on. There is some difficulty in deciding
what is to be considered _one_ sense-datum: often attention causes
divisions to appear where, so far as can be discovered, there were no
divisions before. An observed complex fact, such as that this patch of
red is to the left of that patch of blue, is also to be regarded as a
datum from our present point of view: epistemologically, it does not
differ greatly from a simple sense-datum as regards its function in
giving knowledge. Its _logical_ structure is very different, however,
from that of sense: _sense_ gives acquaintance with particulars, and
is thus a two-term relation in which the object can be _named_ but not
_asserted_, and is inherently incapable of truth or falsehood, whereas
the observation of a complex fact, which may be suitably called
perception, is not a two-term relation, but involves the propositional
form on the object-side, and gives knowledge of a truth, not mere
acquaintance with a particular. This logical difference, important as
it is, is not very relevant to our present problem; and it will be
convenient to regard data of perception as included among sense-data
for the purposes of this paper. It is to be observed that the
particulars which are constituents of a datum of perception are always
sense-data in the strict sense.

Concerning sense-data, we know that they are there while they are
data, and this is the epistemological basis of all our knowledge of
external particulars. (The meaning of the word "external" of course
raises problems which will concern us later.) We do not know, except
by means of more or less precarious inferences, whether the objects
which are at one time sense-data continue to exist at times when they
are not data. Sense-data at the times when they are data are all that
we directly and primitively know of the external world; hence in
epistemology the fact that they are _data_ is all-important. But the
fact that they are all that we directly know gives, of course, no
presumption that they are all that there is. If we could construct an
impersonal metaphysic, independent of the accidents of our knowledge
and ignorance, the privileged position of the actual data would
probably disappear, and they would probably appear as a rather
haphazard selection from a mass of objects more or less like them. In
saying this, I assume only that it is probable that there are
particulars with which we are not acquainted. Thus the special
importance of sense-data is in relation to epistemology, not to
metaphysics. In this respect, physics is to be reckoned as
metaphysics: it is impersonal, and nominally pays no special attention
to sense-data. It is only when we ask how physics can be _known_ that
the importance of sense-data re-emerges.


III. SENSIBILIA

I shall give the name _sensibilia_ to those objects which have the
same metaphysical and physical status as sense-data, without
necessarily being data to any mind. Thus the relation of a _sensibile_
to a sense-datum is like that of a man to a husband: a man becomes a
husband by entering into the relation of marriage, and similarly a
_sensibile_ becomes a sense-datum by entering into the relation of
acquaintance. It is important to have both terms; for we wish to
discuss whether an object which is at one time a sense-datum can still
exist at a time when it is not a sense-datum. We cannot ask "Can
sense-data exist without being given?" for that is like asking "Can
husbands exist without being married?" We must ask "Can _sensibilia_
exist without being given?" and also "Can a particular _sensibile_ be
at one time a sense-datum, and at another not?" Unless we have the
word _sensibile_ as well as the word "sense-datum," such questions are
apt to entangle us in trivial logical puzzles.

It will be seen that all sense-data are _sensibilia_. It is a
metaphysical question whether all _sensibilia_ are sense-data, and an
epistemological question whether there exist means of inferring
_sensibilia_ which are not data from those that are.

A few preliminary remarks, to be amplified as we proceed, will serve
to elucidate the use which I propose to make of _sensibilia_.

I regard sense-data as not mental, and as being, in fact, part of the
actual subject-matter of physics. There are arguments, shortly to be
examined, for their subjectivity, but these arguments seem to me only
to prove _physiological_ subjectivity, i.e. causal dependence on the
sense-organs, nerves, and brain. The appearance which a thing presents
to us is causally dependent upon these, in exactly the same way as it
is dependent upon intervening fog or smoke or coloured glass. Both
dependences are contained in the statement that the appearance which a
piece of matter presents when viewed from a given place is a function
not only of the piece of matter, but also of the intervening medium.
(The terms used in this statement--"matter," "view from a given
place," "appearance," "intervening medium"--will all be defined in the
course of the present paper.) We have not the means of ascertaining
how things appear from places not surrounded by brain and nerves and
sense-organs, because we cannot leave the body; but continuity makes
it not unreasonable to suppose that they present _some_ appearance at
such places. Any such appearance would be included among _sensibilia_.
If--_per impossibile_--there were a complete human body with no mind
inside it, all those _sensibilia_ would exist, in relation to that
body, which would be sense-data if there were a mind in the body. What
the mind adds to _sensibilia_, in fact, is _merely_ awareness:
everything else is physical or physiological.


IV. SENSE-DATA ARE PHYSICAL

Before discussing this question it will be well to define the sense in
which the terms "mental" and "physical" are to be used. The word
"physical," in all preliminary discussions, is to be understood as
meaning "what is dealt with by physics." Physics, it is plain, tells
us something about some of the constituents of the actual world; what
these constituents are may be doubtful, but it is they that are to be
called physical, whatever their nature may prove to be.

The definition of the term "mental" is more difficult, and can only be
satisfactorily given after many difficult controversies have been
discussed and decided. For present purposes therefore I must content
myself with assuming a dogmatic answer to these controversies. I shall
call a particular "mental" when it is aware of something, and I shall
call a fact "mental" when it contains a mental particular as a
constituent.

It will be seen that the mental and the physical are not necessarily
mutually exclusive, although I know of no reason to suppose that they
overlap.

The doubt as to the correctness of our definition of the "mental" is
of little importance in our present discussion. For what I am
concerned to maintain is that sense-data are physical, and this being
granted it is a matter of indifference in our present inquiry whether
or not they are also mental. Although I do not hold, with Mach and
James and the "new realists," that the difference between the mental
and the physical is _merely_ one of arrangement, yet what I have to
say in the present paper is compatible with their doctrine and might
have been reached from their standpoint.

In discussions on sense-data, two questions are commonly confused,
namely:

(1) Do sensible objects persist when we are not sensible of them? in
other words, do _sensibilia_ which are data at a certain time
sometimes continue to exist at times when they are not data? And (2)
are sense-data mental or physical?

I propose to assert that sense-data are physical, while yet
maintaining that they probably never persist unchanged after ceasing
to be data. The view that they do not persist is often thought, quite
erroneously in my opinion, to imply that they are mental; and this
has, I believe, been a potent source of confusion in regard to our
present problem. If there were, as some have held, a _logical
impossibility_ in sense-data persisting after ceasing to be data, that
certainly would tend to show that they were mental; but if, as I
contend, their non-persistence is merely a probable inference from
empirically ascertained causal laws, then it carries no such
implication with it, and we are quite free to treat them as part of
the subject-matter of physics.

Logically a sense-datum is an object, a particular of which the
subject is aware. It does not contain the subject as a part, as for
example beliefs and volitions do. The existence of the sense-datum is
therefore not logically dependent upon that of the subject; for the
only way, so far as I know, in which the existence of _A_ can be
_logically_ dependent upon the existence of _B_ is when _B_ is part of
_A_. There is therefore no _a priori_ reason why a particular which is
a sense-datum should not persist after it has ceased to be a datum,
nor why other similar particulars should not exist without ever being
data. The view that sense-data are mental is derived, no doubt, in
part from their physiological subjectivity, but in part also from a
failure to distinguish between sense-data and "sensations." By a
sensation I mean the fact consisting in the subject's awareness of the
sense-datum. Thus a sensation is a complex of which the subject is a
constituent and which therefore is mental. The sense-datum, on the
other hand, stands over against the subject as that external object of
which in sensation the subject is aware. It is true that the
sense-datum is in many cases in the subject's body, but the subject's
body is as distinct from the subject as tables and chairs are, and is
in fact merely a part of the material world. So soon, therefore, as
sense-data are clearly distinguished from sensations, and as their
subjectivity is recognised to be physiological not psychical, the
chief obstacles in the way of regarding them as physical are removed.


V. "SENSIBILIA" AND "THINGS"

But if "sensibilia" are to be recognised as the ultimate constituents
of the physical world, a long and difficult journey is to be performed
before we can arrive either at the "thing" of common sense or at the
"matter" of physics. The supposed impossibility of combining the
different sense-data which are regarded as appearances of the same
"thing" to different people has made it seem as though these
"sensibilia" must be regarded as mere subjective phantasms. A given
table will present to one man a rectangular appearance, while to
another it appears to have two acute angles and two obtuse angles; to
one man it appears brown, while to another, towards whom it reflects
the light, it appears white and shiny. It is said, not wholly without
plausibility, that these different shapes and different colours cannot
co-exist simultaneously in the same place, and cannot therefore both
be constituents of the physical world. This argument I must confess
appeared to me until recently to be irrefutable. The contrary opinion
has, however, been ably maintained by Dr. T.P. Nunn in an article
entitled: "Are Secondary Qualities Independent of Perception?"[29] The
supposed impossibility derives its apparent force from the phrase:
"_in the same place_," and it is precisely in this phrase that its
weakness lies. The conception of space is too often treated in
philosophy--even by those who on reflection would not defend such
treatment--as though it were as given, simple, and unambiguous as
Kant, in his psychological innocence, supposed. It is the unperceived
ambiguity of the word "place" which, as we shall shortly see, has
caused the difficulties to realists and given an undeserved advantage
to their opponents. Two "places" of different kinds are involved in
every sense-datum, namely the place _at_ which it appears and the
place _from_ which it appears. These belong to different spaces,
although, as we shall see, it is possible, with certain limitations,
to establish a correlation between them. What we call the different
appearances of the same thing to different observers are each in a
space private to the observer concerned. No place in the private world
of one observer is identical with a place in the private world of
another observer. There is therefore no question of combining the
different appearances in the one place; and the fact that they cannot
all exist in one place affords accordingly no ground whatever for
questioning their physical reality. The "thing" of common sense may in
fact be identified with the whole class of its appearances--where,
however, we must include among appearances not only those which are
actual sense-data, but also those "sensibilia," if any, which, on
grounds of continuity and resemblance, are to be regarded as belonging
to the same system of appearances, although there happen to be no
observers to whom they are data.

An example may make this clearer. Suppose there are a number of people
in a room, all seeing, as they say, the same tables and chairs, walls
and pictures. No two of these people have exactly the same sense-data,
yet there is sufficient similarity among their data to enable them to
group together certain of these data as appearances of one "thing" to
the several spectators, and others as appearances of another "thing."
Besides the appearances which a given thing in the room presents to
the actual spectators, there are, we may suppose, other appearances
which it would present to other possible spectators. If a man were to
sit down between two others, the appearance which the room would
present to him would be intermediate between the appearances which it
presents to the two others: and although this appearance would not
exist as it is without the sense organs, nerves and brain, of the
newly arrived spectator, still it is not unnatural to suppose that,
from the position which he now occupies, _some_ appearance of the
room existed before his arrival. This supposition, however, need
merely be noticed and not insisted upon.

Since the "thing" cannot, without indefensible partiality, be
identified with any single one of its appearances, it came to be
thought of as something distinct from all of them and underlying them.
But by the principle of Occam's razor, if the class of appearances
will fulfil the purposes for the sake of which the thing was invented
by the prehistoric metaphysicians to whom common sense is due, economy
demands that we should identify the thing with the class of its
appearances. It is not necessary to _deny_ a substance or substratum
underlying these appearances; it is merely expedient to abstain from
asserting this unnecessary entity. Our procedure here is precisely
analogous to that which has swept away from the philosophy of
mathematics the useless menagerie of metaphysical monsters with which
it used to be infested.


VI. CONSTRUCTIONS VERSUS INFERENCES

Before proceeding to analyse and explain the ambiguities of the word
"place," a few general remarks on method are desirable. The supreme
maxim in scientific philosophising is this:

  _Wherever possible, logical constructions are to be substituted
  for inferred entities._

Some examples of the substitution of construction for inference in the
realm of mathematical philosophy may serve to elucidate the uses of
this maxim. Take first the case of irrationals. In old days,
irrationals were inferred as the supposed limits of series of
rationals which had no rational limit; but the objection to this
procedure was that it left the existence of irrationals merely
optative, and for this reason the stricter methods of the present day
no longer tolerate such a definition. We now define an irrational
number as a certain class of ratios, thus constructing it logically by
means of ratios, instead of arriving at it by a doubtful inference
from them. Take again the case of cardinal numbers. Two equally
numerous collections appear to have something in common: this
something is supposed to be their cardinal number. But so long as the
cardinal number is inferred from the collections, not constructed in
terms of them, its existence must remain in doubt, unless in virtue of
a metaphysical postulate _ad hoc_. By defining the cardinal number of
a given collection as the class of all equally numerous collections,
we avoid the necessity of this metaphysical postulate, and thereby
remove a needless element of doubt from the philosophy of arithmetic.
A similar method, as I have shown elsewhere, can be applied to classes
themselves, which need not be supposed to have any metaphysical
reality, but can be regarded as symbolically constructed fictions.

The method by which the construction proceeds is closely analogous in
these and all similar cases. Given a set of propositions nominally
dealing with the supposed inferred entities, we observe the properties
which are required of the supposed entities in order to make these
propositions true. By dint of a little logical ingenuity, we then
construct some logical function of less hypothetical entities which
has the requisite properties. This constructed function we substitute
for the supposed inferred entities, and thereby obtain a new and less
doubtful interpretation of the body of propositions in question. This
method, so fruitful in the philosophy of mathematics, will be found
equally applicable in the philosophy of physics, where, I do not
doubt, it would have been applied long ago but for the fact that all
who have studied this subject hitherto have been completely ignorant
of mathematical logic. I myself cannot claim originality in the
application of this method to physics, since I owe the suggestion and
the stimulus for its application entirely to my friend and
collaborator Dr. Whitehead, who is engaged in applying it to the more
mathematical portions of the region intermediate between sense-data
and the points, instants and particles of physics.

A complete application of the method which substitutes constructions
for inferences would exhibit matter wholly in terms of sense-data, and
even, we may add, of the sense-data of a single person, since the
sense-data of others cannot be known without some element of
inference. This, however, must remain for the present an ideal, to be
approached as nearly as possible, but to be reached, if at all, only
after a long preliminary labour of which as yet we can only see the
very beginning. The inferences which are unavoidable can, however, be
subjected to certain guiding principles. In the first place they
should always be made perfectly explicit, and should be formulated in
the most general manner possible. In the second place the inferred
entities should, whenever this can be done, be similar to those whose
existence is given, rather than, like the Kantian _Ding an sich_,
something wholly remote from the data which nominally support the
inference. The inferred entities which I shall allow myself are of two
kinds: (_a_) the sense-data of other people, in favour of which there
is the evidence of testimony, resting ultimately upon the analogical
argument in favour of minds other than my own; (_b_) the "sensibilia"
which would appear from places where there happen to be no minds, and
which I suppose to be real although they are no one's data. Of these
two classes of inferred entities, the first will probably be allowed
to pass unchallenged. It would give me the greatest satisfaction to be
able to dispense with it, and thus establish physics upon a
solipsistic basis; but those--and I fear they are the majority--in
whom the human affections are stronger than the desire for logical
economy, will, no doubt, not share my desire to render solipsism
scientifically satisfactory. The second class of inferred entities
raises much more serious questions. It may be thought monstrous to
maintain that a thing can present any appearance at all in a place
where no sense organs and nervous structure exist through which it
could appear. I do not myself feel the monstrosity; nevertheless I
should regard these supposed appearances only in the light of a
hypothetical scaffolding, to be used while the edifice of physics is
being raised, though possibly capable of being removed as soon as the
edifice is completed. These "sensibilia" which are not data to anyone
are therefore to be taken rather as an illustrative hypothesis and as
an aid in preliminary statement than as a dogmatic part of the
philosophy of physics in its final form.


VII. PRIVATE SPACE AND THE SPACE OF PERSPECTIVES

We have now to explain the ambiguity in the word "place," and how it
comes that two places of different sorts are associated with every
sense-datum, namely the place _at_ which it is and the place _from_
which it is perceived. The theory to be advocated is closely analogous
to Leibniz's monadology, from which it differs chiefly in being less
smooth and tidy.

The first fact to notice is that, so far as can be discovered, no
sensibile is ever a datum to two people at once. The things seen by
two different people are often closely similar, so similar that the
same _words_ can be used to denote them, without which communication
with others concerning sensible objects would be impossible. But, in
spite of this similarity, it would seem that some difference always
arises from difference in the point of view. Thus each person, so far
as his sense-data are concerned, lives in a private world. This
private world contains its own space, or rather spaces, for it would
seem that only experience teaches us to correlate the space of sight
with the space of touch and with the various other spaces of other
senses. This multiplicity of private spaces, however, though
interesting to the psychologist, is of no great importance in regard
to our present problem, since a merely solipsistic experience enables
us to correlate them into the one private space which embraces all our
own sense-data. The place _at_ which a sense-datum is, is a place in
private space. This place therefore is different from any place in the
private space of another percipient. For if we assume, as logical
economy demands, that all position is relative, a place is only
definable by the things in or around it, and therefore the same place
cannot occur in two private worlds which have no common constituent.
The question, therefore, of combining what we call different
appearances of the same thing in the same place does not arise, and
the fact that a given object appears to different spectators to have
different shapes and colours affords no argument against the physical
reality of all these shapes and colours.

In addition to the private spaces belonging to the private worlds of
different percipients, there is, however, another space, in which one
whole private world counts as a point, or at least as a spatial unit.
This might be described as the space of points of view, since each
private world may be regarded as the appearance which the universe
presents from a certain point of view. I prefer, however, to speak of
it as the space of _perspectives_, in order to obviate the suggestion
that a private world is only real when someone views it. And for the
same reason, when I wish to speak of a private world without assuming
a percipient, I shall call it a "perspective."

We have now to explain how the different perspectives are ordered in
one space. This is effected by means of the correlated "sensibilia"
which are regarded as the appearances, in different perspectives, of
one and the same thing. By moving, and by testimony, we discover that
two different perspectives, though they cannot both contain the same
"sensibilia," may nevertheless contain very similar ones; and the
spatial order of a certain group of "sensibilia" in a private space of
one perspective is found to be identical with, or very similar to, the
spatial order of the correlated "sensibilia" in the private space of
another perspective. In this way one "sensibile" in one perspective is
correlated with one "sensibile" in another. Such correlated
"sensibilia" will be called "appearances of one thing." In Leibniz's
monadology, since each monad mirrored the whole universe, there was in
each perspective a "sensibile" which was an appearance of each thing.
In our system of perspectives, we make no such assumption of
completeness. A given thing will have appearances in some
perspectives, but presumably not in certain others. The "thing" being
defined as the class of its appearances, if  is the class of
perspectives in which a certain thing  appears, then  is a member of
the multiplicative class of ,  being a class of mutually exclusive
classes of "sensibilia." And similarly a perspective is a member of
the multiplicative class of the things which appear in it.

The arrangement of perspectives in a space is effected by means of the
differences between the appearances of a given thing in the various
perspectives. Suppose, say, that a certain penny appears in a number
of different perspectives; in some it looks larger and in some
smaller, in some it looks circular, in others it presents the
appearance of an ellipse of varying eccentricity. We may collect
together all those perspectives in which the appearance of the penny
is circular. These we will place on one straight line, ordering them
in a series by the variations in the apparent size of the penny. Those
perspectives in which the penny appears as a straight line of a
certain thickness will similarly be placed upon a plane (though in
this case there will be many different perspectives in which the penny
is of the same size; when one arrangement is completed these will form
a circle concentric with the penny), and ordered as before by the
apparent size of the penny. By such means, all those perspectives in
which the penny presents a visual appearance can be arranged in a
three-dimensional spatial order. Experience shows that the same
spatial order of perspectives would have resulted if, instead of the
penny, we had chosen any other thing which appeared in all the
perspectives in question, or any other method of utilising the
differences between the appearances of the same things in different
perspectives. It is this empirical fact which has made it possible to
construct the one all-embracing space of physics.

The space whose construction has just been explained, and whose
elements are whole perspectives, will be called "perspective-space."


VIII. THE PLACING OF "THINGS" AND "SENSIBILIA" IN PERSPECTIVE SPACE

The world which we have so far constructed is a world of six
dimensions, since it is a three-dimensional series of perspectives,
each of which is itself three-dimensional. We have now to explain the
correlation between the perspective space and the various private
spaces contained within the various perspectives severally. It is by
means of this correlation that the one three-dimensional space of
physics is constructed; and it is because of the unconscious
performance of this correlation that the distinction between
perspective space and the percipient's private space has been blurred,
with disastrous results for the philosophy of physics. Let us revert
to our penny: the perspectives in which the penny appears larger are
regarded as being nearer to the penny than those in which it appears
smaller, but as far as experience goes the apparent size of the penny
will not grow beyond a certain limit, namely, that where (as we say)
the penny is so near the eye that if it were any nearer it could not
be seen. By touch we may prolong the series until the penny touches
the eye, but no further. If we have been travelling along a line of
perspectives in the previously defined sense, we may, however, by
imagining the penny removed, prolong the line of perspectives by
means, say, of another penny; and the same may be done with any other
line of perspectives defined by means of the penny. All these lines
meet in a certain place, that is, in a certain perspective. This
perspective will be defined as "the place where the penny is."

It is now evident in what sense two places in constructed physical
space are associated with a given "sensibile." There is first the
place which is the perspective of which the "sensibile" is a member.
This is the place _from_ which the "sensibile" appears. Secondly there
is the place where the thing is of which the "sensibile" is a member,
in other words an appearance; this is the place _at_ which the
"sensibile" appears. The "sensibile" which is a member of one
perspective is correlated with another perspective, namely, that which
is the place where the thing is of which the "sensibile" is an
appearance. To the psychologist the "place from which" is the more
interesting, and the "sensibile" accordingly appears to him subjective
and where the percipient is. To the physicist the "place at which" is
the more interesting, and the "sensibile" accordingly appears to him
physical and external. The causes, limits and partial justification of
each of these two apparently incompatible views are evident from the
above duplicity of places associated with a given "sensibile."

We have seen that we can assign to a physical thing a place in the
perspective space. In this way different parts of our body acquire
positions in perspective space, and therefore there is a meaning
(whether true or false need not much concern us) in saying that the
perspective to which our sense-data belong is inside our head. Since
our mind is correlated with the perspective to which our sense-data
belong, we may regard this perspective as being the position of our
mind in perspective space. If, therefore, this perspective is, in the
above defined sense, inside our head, there is a good meaning for the
statement that the mind is in the head. We can now say of the various
appearances of a given thing that some of them are nearer to the thing
than others; those are nearer which belong to perspectives that are
nearer to "the place where the thing is." We can thus find a meaning,
true or false, for the statement that more is to be learnt about a
thing by examining it close to than by viewing it from a distance. We
can also find a meaning for the phrase "the things which intervene
between the subject and a thing of which an appearance is a datum to
him." One reason often alleged for the subjectivity of sense-data is
that the appearance of a thing may change when we find it hard to
suppose that the thing itself has changed--for example, when the
change is due to our shutting our eyes, or to our screwing them up so
as to make the thing look double. If the thing is defined as the class
of its appearances (which is the definition adopted above), there is
of course necessarily _some_ change in the thing whenever any one of
its appearances changes. Nevertheless there is a very important
distinction between two different ways in which the appearances may
change. If after looking at a thing I shut my eyes, the appearance of
my eyes changes in every perspective in which there is such an
appearance, whereas most of the appearances of the thing will remain
unchanged. We may say, as a matter of definition, that a thing changes
when, however near to the thing an appearance of it may be, there are
changes in appearances as near as, or still nearer to, the thing. On
the other hand we shall say that the change is in some other thing if
all appearances of the thing which are at not more than a certain
distance from the thing remain unchanged, while only comparatively
distant appearances of the thing are altered. From this consideration
we are naturally led to the consideration of _matter_, which must be
our next topic.


IX. THE DEFINITION OF MATTER

We defined the "physical thing" as the class of its appearances, but
this can hardly be taken as a definition of matter. We want to be able
to express the fact that the appearance of a thing in a given
perspective is causally affected by the matter between the thing and
the perspective. We have found a meaning for "between a thing and a
perspective." But we want matter to be something other than the whole
class of appearances of a thing, in order to state the influence of
matter on appearances.

We commonly assume that the information we get about a thing is more
accurate when the thing is nearer. Far off, we see it is a man; then
we see it is Jones; then we see he is smiling. Complete accuracy would
only be attainable as a limit: if the appearances of Jones as we
approach him tend towards a limit, that limit may be taken to be what
Jones really is. It is obvious that from the point of view of physics
the appearances of a thing close to "count" more than the appearances
far off. We may therefore set up the following tentative definition:

The _matter_ of a given thing is the limit of its appearances as their
distance from the thing diminishes.

It seems probable that there is something in this definition, but it
is not quite satisfactory, because empirically there is no such limit
to be obtained from sense-data. The definition will have to be eked
out by constructions and definitions. But probably it suggests the
right direction in which to look.

We are now in a position to understand in outline the reverse journey
from matter to sense-data which is performed by physics. The
appearance of a thing in a given perspective is a function of the
matter composing the thing and of the intervening matter. The
appearance of a thing is altered by intervening smoke or mist, by blue
spectacles or by alterations in the sense-organs or nerves of the
percipient (which also must be reckoned as part of the intervening
medium). The nearer we approach to the thing, the less its appearance
is affected by the intervening matter. As we travel further and
further from the thing, its appearances diverge more and more from
their initial character; and the causal laws of their divergence are
to be stated in terms of the matter which lies between them and the
thing. Since the appearances at very small distances are less affected
by causes other than the thing itself, we come to think that the limit
towards which these appearances tend as the distance diminishes is
what the thing "really is," as opposed to what it merely seems to be.
This, together with its necessity for the statement of causal laws,
seems to be the source of the entirely erroneous feeling that matter
is more "real" than sense-data.

Consider for example the infinite divisibility of matter. In looking
at a given thing and approaching it, one sense-datum will become
several, and each of these will again divide. Thus _one_ appearance
may represent _many_ things, and to this process there seems no end.
Hence in the limit, when we approach indefinitely near to the thing
there will be an indefinite number of units of matter corresponding to
what, at a finite distance, is only one appearance. This is how
infinite divisibility arises.

The whole causal efficacy of a thing resides in its matter. This is in
some sense an empirical fact, but it would be hard to state it
precisely, because "causal efficacy" is difficult to define.

What can be known empirically about the matter of a thing is only
approximate, because we cannot get to know the appearances of the
thing from very small distances, and cannot accurately infer the limit
of these appearances. But it _is_ inferred _approximately_ by means of
the appearances we can observe. It then turns out that these
appearances can be exhibited by physics as a function of the matter
in our immediate neighbourhood; e.g. the visual appearance of a
distant object is a function of the light-waves that reach the eyes.
This leads to confusions of thought, but offers no real difficulty.

One appearance, of a visible object for example, is not sufficient to
determine its other simultaneous appearances, although it goes a
certain distance towards determining them. The determination of the
hidden structure of a thing, so far as it is possible at all, can only
be effected by means of elaborate dynamical inferences.


X. TIME[30]

It seems that the one all-embracing time is a construction, like the
one all-embracing space. Physics itself has become conscious of this
fact through the discussions connected with relativity.

Between two perspectives which both belong to one person's experience,
there will be a direct time-relation of before and after. This
suggests a way of dividing history in the same sort of way as it is
divided by different experiences, but without introducing experience
or anything mental: we may define a "biography" as everything that is
(directly) earlier or later than, or simultaneous with, a given
"sensibile." This will give a series of perspectives, which _might_
all form parts of one person's experience, though it is not necessary
that all or any of them should actually do so. By this means, the
history of the world is divided into a number of mutually exclusive
biographies.

We have now to correlate the times in the different biographies. The
natural thing would be to say that the appearances of a given
(momentary) thing in two different perspectives belonging to different
biographies are to be taken as simultaneous; but this is not
convenient. Suppose _A_ shouts to _B_, and _B_ replies as soon as he
hears _A's_ shout. Then between _A's_ hearing of his own shout and his
hearing of _B's_ there is an interval; thus if we made _A's_ and _B's_
hearing of the same shout exactly simultaneous with each other, we
should have events exactly simultaneous with a given event but not
with each other. To obviate this, we assume a "velocity of sound."
That is, we assume that the time when _B_ hears _A's_ shout is
half-way between the time when _A_ hears his own shout and the time
when he hears _B's_. In this way the correlation is effected.

What has been said about sound applies of course equally to light. The
general principle is that the appearances, in different perspectives,
which are to be grouped together as constituting what a certain thing
is at a certain moment, are not to be all regarded as being at that
moment. On the contrary they spread outward from the thing with
various velocities according to the nature of the appearances. Since
no _direct_ means exist of correlating the time in one biography with
the time in another, this temporal grouping of the appearances
belonging to a given thing at a given moment is in part conventional.
Its motive is partly to secure the verification of such maxims as that
events which are exactly simultaneous with the same event are exactly
simultaneous with one another, partly to secure convenience in the
formulation of causal laws.


XI. THE PERSISTENCE OF THINGS AND MATTER

Apart from any of the fluctuating hypotheses of physics, three main
problems arise in connecting the world of physics with the world of
sense, namely:

    1. the construction of a single space;
    2. the construction of a single time;
    3. the construction of permanent things or matter.

We have already considered the first and second of these problems; it
remains to consider the third.

We have seen how correlated appearances in different perspectives are
combined to form one "thing" at one moment in the all-embracing time
of physics. We have now to consider how appearances at different times
are combined as belonging to one "thing," and how we arrive at the
persistent "matter" of physics. The assumption of permanent substance,
which technically underlies the procedure of physics, cannot of course
be regarded as metaphysically legitimate: just as the one thing
simultaneously seen by many people is a construction, so the one thing
seen at different times by the same or different people must be a
construction, being in fact nothing but a certain grouping of certain
"sensibilia."

We have seen that the momentary state of a "thing" is an assemblage of
"sensibilia," in different perspectives, not all simultaneous in the
one constructed time, but spreading out from "the place where the
thing is" with velocities depending upon the nature of the
"sensibilia." The time _at_ which the "thing" is in this state is the
lower limit of the times at which these appearances occur. We have now
to consider what leads us to speak of another set of appearances as
belonging to the same "thing" at a different time.

For this purpose, we may, at least to begin with, confine ourselves
within a single biography. If we can always say when two "sensibilia"
in a given biography are appearances of one thing, then, since we have
seen how to connect "sensibilia" in different biographies as
appearances of the same momentary state of a thing, we shall have all
that is necessary for the complete construction of the history of a
thing.

It is to be observed, to begin with, that the identity of a thing for
common sense is not always correlated with the identity of matter for
physics. A human body is one persisting thing for common sense, but
for physics its matter is constantly changing. We may say, broadly,
that the common-sense conception is based upon continuity in
appearances at the ordinary distances of sense-data, while the
physical conception is based upon the continuity of appearances at
very small distances from the thing. It is probable that the
common-sense conception is not capable of complete precision. Let us
therefore concentrate our attention upon the conception of the
persistence of matter in physics.

The first characteristic of two appearances of the same piece of
matter at different times is _continuity_. The two appearances must be
connected by a series of intermediaries, which, if time and space form
compact series, must themselves form a compact series. The colour of
the leaves is different in autumn from what it is in summer; but we
believe that the change occurs gradually, and that, if the colours are
different at two given times, there are intermediate times at which
the colours are intermediate between those at the given times.

But there are two considerations that are important as regards
continuity.

First, it is largely hypothetical. We do not observe any one thing
continuously, and it is merely a hypothesis to assume that, while we
are not observing it, it passes through conditions intermediate
between those in which it is perceived. During uninterrupted
observation, it is true, continuity is nearly verified; but even here,
when motions are very rapid, as in the case of explosions, the
continuity is not actually capable of direct verification. Thus we can
only say that the sense-data are found to _permit_ a hypothetical
complement of "sensibilia" such as will preserve continuity, and that
therefore there _may_ be such a complement. Since, however, we have
already made such use of hypothetical "sensibilia," we will let this
point pass, and admit such "sensibilia" as are required to preserve
continuity.

Secondly, continuity is not a sufficient criterion of material
identity. It is true that in many cases, such as rocks, mountains,
tables, chairs, etc., where the appearances change slowly, continuity
is sufficient, but in other cases, such as the parts of an
approximately homogeneous fluid, it fails us utterly. We can travel by
sensibly continuous gradations from any one drop of the sea at any one
time to any other drop at any other time. We infer the motions of
sea-water from the effects of the current, but they cannot be inferred
from direct sensible observation together with the assumption of
continuity.

The characteristic required in addition to continuity is conformity
with the laws of dynamics. Starting from what common sense regards as
persistent things, and making only such modifications as from time to
time seem reasonable, we arrive at assemblages of "sensibilia" which
are found to obey certain simple laws, namely those of dynamics. By
regarding "sensibilia" at different times as belonging to the same
piece of matter, we are able to define _motion_, which presupposes the
assumption or construction of something persisting throughout the
time of the motion. The motions which are regarded as occurring,
during a period in which all the "sensibilia" and the times of their
appearance are given, will be different according to the manner in
which we combine "sensibilia" at different times as belonging to the
same piece of matter. Thus even when the whole history of the world is
given in every particular, the question what motions take place is
still to a certain extent arbitrary even after the assumption of
continuity. Experience shows that it is possible to determine motions
in such a way as to satisfy the laws of dynamics, and that this
determination, roughly and on the whole, is fairly in agreement with
the common-sense opinions about persistent things. This determination,
therefore, is adopted, and leads to a criterion by which we can
determine, sometimes practically, sometimes only theoretically,
whether two appearances at different times are to be regarded as
belonging to the same piece of matter. The persistence of all matter
throughout all time can, I imagine, be secured by definition.

To recommend this conclusion, we must consider what it is that is
proved by the empirical success of physics. What is proved is that its
hypotheses, though unverifiable where they go beyond sense-data, are
at no point in contradiction with sense-data, but, on the contrary,
are ideally such as to render all sense-data calculable when a
sufficient collection of "sensibilia" is given. Now physics has found
it empirically possible to collect sense-data into series, each series
being regarded as belonging to one "thing," and behaving, with regard
to the laws of physics, in a way in which series not belonging to one
thing would in general not behave. If it is to be unambiguous whether
two appearances belong to the same thing or not, there must be only
one way of grouping appearances so that the resulting things obey the
laws of physics. It would be very difficult to prove that this is the
case, but for our present purposes we may let this point pass, and
assume that there is only one way. Thus we may lay down the following
definition: _Physical things are those series of appearances whose
matter obeys the laws of physics_. That such series exist is an
empirical fact, which constitutes the verifiability of physics.


XII. ILLUSIONS, HALLUCINATIONS, AND DREAMS

It remains to ask how, in our system, we are to find a place for
sense-data which apparently fail to have the usual connection with the
world of physics. Such sense-data are of various kinds, requiring
somewhat different treatment. But all are of the sort that would be
called "unreal," and therefore, before embarking upon the discussion,
certain logical remarks must be made upon the conceptions of reality
and unreality.

Mr. A. Wolf[31] says:

  "The conception of mind as a system of transparent activities is,
  I think, also untenable because of its failure to account for the
  very possibility of dreams and hallucinations. It seems impossible
  to realise how a bare, transparent activity can be directed to
  what is not there, to apprehend what is not given."

This statement is one which, probably, most people would endorse. But
it is open to two objections. First it is difficult to see how an
activity, however un-"transparent," can be directed towards a nothing:
a term of a relation cannot be a mere nonentity. Secondly, no reason
is given, and I am convinced that none can be given, for the assertion
that dream-objects are not "there" and not "given." Let us take the
second point first.

(1) The belief that dream-objects are not given comes, I think, from
failure to distinguish, as regards waking life, between the
sense-datum and the corresponding "thing." In dreams, there is no such
corresponding "thing" as the dreamer supposes; if, therefore, the
"thing" were given in waking life, as e.g. Meinong maintains,[32] then
there would be a difference in respect of givenness between dreams and
waking life. But if, as we have maintained, what is given is never the
thing, but merely one of the "sensibilia" which compose the thing,
then what we apprehend in a dream is just as much given as what we
apprehend in waking life.

Exactly the same argument applies as to the dream-objects being
"there." They have their position in the private space of the
perspective of the dreamer; where they fail is in their correlation
with other private spaces and therefore with perspective space. But in
the only sense in which "there" can be a datum, they are "there" just
as truly as any of the sense-data of waking life.

(2) The conception of "illusion" or "unreality," and the correlative
conception of "reality," are generally used in a way which embodies
profound logical confusions. Words that go in pairs, such as "real"
and "unreal," "existent" and "non-existent," "valid" and "invalid,"
etc., are all derived from the one fundamental pair, "true" and
"false." Now "true" and "false" are applicable only--except in
derivative significations--to _propositions_. Thus wherever the above
pairs can be significantly applied, we must be dealing either with
propositions or with such incomplete phrases as only acquire meaning
when put into a context which, with them, forms a proposition. Thus
such pairs of words can be applied to _descriptions_,[33] but not to
proper names: in other words, they have no application whatever to
data, but only to entities or non-entities described in terms of data.

Let us illustrate by the terms "existence" and "non-existence." Given
any datum _x_, it is meaningless either to assert or to deny that _x_
"exists." We might be tempted to say: "Of course _x_ exists, for
otherwise it could not be a datum." But such a statement is really
meaningless, although it is significant and true to say "My present
sense-datum exists," and it may also be true that "_x_ is my present
sense-datum." The inference from these two propositions to "_x_
exists" is one which seems irresistible to people unaccustomed to
logic; yet the apparent proposition inferred is not merely false, but
strictly meaningless. To say "My present sense-datum exists" is to say
(roughly): "There is an object of which 'my present sense-datum' is a
description." But we cannot say: "There is an object of which '_x_' is
a description," because '_x_' is (in the case we are supposing) a
name, not a description. Dr. Whitehead and I have explained this point
fully elsewhere (_loc. cit._) with the help of symbols, without which
it is hard to understand; I shall not therefore here repeat the
demonstration of the above propositions, but shall proceed with their
application to our present problem.

The fact that "existence" is only applicable to descriptions is
concealed by the use of what are grammatically proper names in a way
which really transforms them into descriptions. It is, for example, a
legitimate question whether Homer existed; but here "Homer" means
"the author of the Homeric poems," and is a description. Similarly we
may ask whether God exists; but then "God" means "the Supreme Being"
or "the _ens realissimum_" or whatever other description we may
prefer. If "God" were a proper name, God would have to be a datum; and
then no question could arise as to His existence. The distinction
between existence and other predicates, which Kant obscurely felt, is
brought to light by the theory of descriptions, and is seen to remove
"existence" altogether from the fundamental notions of metaphysics.

What has been said about "existence" applies equally to "reality,"
which may, in fact, be taken as synonymous with "existence."
Concerning the immediate objects in illusions, hallucinations, and
dreams, it is meaningless to ask whether they "exist" or are "real."
There they are, and that ends the matter. But we may legitimately
inquire as to the existence or reality of "things" or other
"sensibilia" inferred from such objects. It is the unreality of these
"things" and other "sensibilia," together with a failure to notice
that they are not data, which has led to the view that the objects of
dreams are unreal.

We may now apply these considerations in detail to the stock arguments
against realism, though what is to be said will be mainly a repetition
of what others have said before.

(1) We have first the variety of normal appearances, supposed to be
incompatible. This is the case of the different shapes and colours
which a given thing presents to different spectators. Locke's water
which seems both hot and cold belongs to this class of cases. Our
system of different perspectives fully accounts for these cases, and
shows that they afford no argument against realism.

(2) We have cases where the correlation between different senses is
unusual. The bent stick in water belongs here. People say it looks
bent but is straight: this only means that it is straight to the
touch, though bent to sight. There is no "illusion," but only a false
inference, if we think that the stick would feel bent to the touch.
The stick would look just as bent in a photograph, and, as Mr.
Gladstone used to say, "the photograph cannot lie."[34] The case of
seeing double also belongs here, though in this case the cause of the
unusual correlation is physiological, and would therefore not operate
in a photograph. It is a mistake to ask whether the "thing" is
duplicated when we see it double. The "thing" is a whole system of
"sensibilia," and it is only those visual "sensibilia" which are data
to the percipient that are duplicated. The phenomenon has a purely
physiological explanation; indeed, in view of our having two eyes, it
is in less need of explanation than the single visual sense-datum
which we normally obtain from the things on which we focus.

(3) We come now to cases like dreams, which may, at the moment of
dreaming, contain nothing to arouse suspicion, but are condemned on the
ground of their supposed incompatibility with earlier and later data. Of
course it often happens that dream-objects fail to behave in the
accustomed manner: heavy objects fly, solid objects melt, babies turn
into pigs or undergo even greater changes. But none of these unusual
occurrences _need_ happen in a dream, and it is not on account of such
occurrences that dream-objects are called "unreal." It is their lack of
continuity with the dreamer's past and future that makes him, when he
wakes, condemn them; and it is their lack of correlation with other
private worlds that makes others condemn them. Omitting the latter
ground, our reason for condemning them is that the "things" which we
infer from them cannot be combined according to the laws of physics with
the "things" inferred from waking sense-data. This might be used to
condemn the "things" inferred from the data of dreams. Dream-data are no
doubt appearances of "things," but not of such "things" as the dreamer
supposes. I have no wish to combat psychological theories of dreams,
such as those of the psycho-analysts. But there certainly are cases
where (whatever psychological causes may contribute) the presence of
physical causes also is very evident. For instance, a door banging may
produce a dream of a naval engagement, with images of battleships and
sea and smoke. The whole dream will be an appearance of the door
banging, but owing to the peculiar condition of the body (especially the
brain) during sleep, this appearance is not that expected to be produced
by a door banging, and thus the dreamer is led to entertain false
beliefs. But his sense-data are still physical, and are such as a
completed physics would include and calculate.

(4) The last class of illusions are those which cannot be discovered
within one person's experience, except through the discovery of
discrepancies with the experiences of others. Dreams might conceivably
belong to this class, if they were jointed sufficiently neatly into
waking life; but the chief instances are recurrent sensory
hallucinations of the kind that lead to insanity. What makes the
patient, in such cases, become what others call insane is the fact
that, within his own experience, there is nothing to show that the
hallucinatory sense-data do not have the usual kind of connection with
"sensibilia" in other perspectives. Of course he may learn this
through testimony, but he probably finds it simpler to suppose that
the testimony is untrue and that he is being wilfully deceived. There
is, so far as I can see, no theoretical criterion by which the patient
can decide, in such a case, between the two equally satisfactory
hypotheses of his madness and of his friends' mendacity.

From the above instances it would appear that abnormal sense-data, of
the kind which we regard as deceptive, have intrinsically just the
same status as any others, but differ as regards their correlations or
causal connections with other "sensibilia" and with "things." Since
the usual correlations and connections become part of our unreflective
expectations, and even seem, except to the psychologist, to form part
of our data, it comes to be thought, mistakenly, that in such cases
the data are unreal, whereas they are merely the causes of false
inferences. The fact that correlations and connections of unusual
kinds occur adds to the difficulty of inferring things from sense and
of expressing physics in terms of sense-data. But the unusualness
would seem to be always physically or physiologically explicable, and
therefore raises only a complication, not a philosophical objection.

I conclude, therefore, that no valid objection exists to the view
which regards sense-data as part of the actual substance of the
physical world, and that, on the other hand, this view is the only one
which accounts for the empirical verifiability of physics. In the
present paper, I have given only a rough preliminary sketch. In
particular, the part played by _time_ in the construction of the
physical world is, I think, more fundamental than would appear from
the above account. I should hope that, with further elaboration, the
part played by unperceived "sensibilia" could be indefinitely
diminished, probably by invoking the history of a "thing" to eke out
the inferences derivable from its momentary appearance.

FOOTNOTES:

[29] _Proc. Arist. Soc._, 1909-1910, pp. 191-218.

[30] On this subject, compare _A Theory of Time and Space_, by Mr.
A.A. Robb (Camb. Univ. Press), which first suggested to me the views
advocated here, though I have, for present purposes, omitted what is
most interesting and novel in his theory. Mr. Robb has given a sketch
of his theory in a pamphlet with the same title (Heffer and Sons,
Cambridge, 1913).

[31] "Natural Realism and Present Tendencies in Philosophy," _Proc.
Arist. Soc._, 1908-1909, p. 165.

[32] _Die Erfahrungsgrundlagen unseres Wissens_, p. 28.

[33] Cf. _Principia Mathematica_, Vol. I, * 14, and Introduction,
Chap. III. For the definition of _existence_, cf. * 14. 02.

[34] Cf. Edwin B. Holt, _The Place of Illusory Experience in a
Realistic World._ "The New Realism," p. 303, both on this point and as
regards _seeing double_.




IX

ON THE NOTION OF CAUSE


In the following paper I wish, first, to maintain that the word
"cause" is so inextricably bound up with misleading associations as to
make its complete extrusion from the philosophical vocabulary
desirable; secondly, to inquire what principle, if any, is employed in
science in place of the supposed "law of causality" which philosophers
imagine to be employed; thirdly, to exhibit certain confusions,
especially in regard to teleology and determinism, which appear to me
to be connected with erroneous notions as to causality.

All philosophers, of every school, imagine that causation is one of
the fundamental axioms or postulates of science, yet, oddly enough, in
advanced sciences such as gravitational astronomy, the word "cause"
never occurs. Dr. James Ward, in his _Naturalism and Agnosticism_,
makes this a ground of complaint against physics: the business of
those who wish to ascertain the ultimate truth about the world, he
apparently thinks, should be the discovery of causes, yet physics
never even seeks them. To me it seems that philosophy ought not to
assume such legislative functions, and that the reason why physics has
ceased to look for causes is that, in fact, there are no such things.
The law of causality, I believe, like much that passes muster among
philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age, surviving, like the
monarchy, only because it is erroneously supposed to do no harm. In
order to find out what philosophers commonly understand by "cause," I
consulted Baldwin's _Dictionary_, and was rewarded beyond my
expectations, for I found the following three mutually incompatible
definitions:--

  "CAUSALITY. (1) The necessary connection of events in the
     time-series....

  "CAUSE (notion of). Whatever may be included in the thought or
     perception of a process as taking place in consequence of
     another process....

  "CAUSE AND EFFECT. (1) Cause and effect ... are correlative terms
     denoting any two distinguishable things, phases, or aspects of
     reality, which are so related to each other that whenever the
     first ceases to exist the second comes into existence
     immediately after, and whenever the second comes into existence
     the first has ceased to exist immediately before."

Let us consider these three definitions in turn. The first, obviously,
is unintelligible without a definition of "necessary." Under this
head, Baldwin's _Dictionary_ gives the following:--

  "NECESSARY. That is necessary which not only is true, but would
     be true under all circumstances. Something more than brute
     compulsion is, therefore, involved in the conception; there is
     a general law under which the thing takes place."

The notion of cause is so intimately connected with that of necessity
that it will be no digression to linger over the above definition,
with a view to discovering, if possible, _some_ meaning of which it is
capable; for, as it stands, it is very far from having any definite
signification.

The first point to notice is that, if any meaning is to be given to
the phrase "would be true under all circumstances," the subject of it
must be a propositional function, not a proposition.[35] A
proposition is simply true or false, and that ends the matter: there
can be no question of "circumstances." "Charles I's head was cut off"
is just as true in summer as in winter, on Sundays as on Mondays. Thus
when it is worth saying that something "would be true under all
circumstances," the something in question must be a propositional
function, i.e. an expression containing a variable, and becoming a
proposition when a value is assigned to the variable; the varying
"circumstances" alluded to are then the different values of which the
variable is capable. Thus if "necessary" means "what is true under all
circumstances," then "if _x_ is a man, _x_ is mortal" is necessary,
because it is true for any possible value of _x_. Thus we should be
led to the following definition:--

  "NECESSARY is a predicate of a propositional function, meaning
     that it is true for all possible values of its argument or
     arguments."

Unfortunately, however, the definition in Baldwin's _Dictionary_ says
that what is necessary is not only "true under all circumstances" but
is also "true." Now these two are incompatible. Only propositions can
be "true," and only propositional functions can be "true under all
circumstances." Hence the definition as it stands is nonsense. What is
meant seems to be this: "A proposition is necessary when it is a value
of a propositional function which is true under all circumstances,
i.e. for all values of its argument or arguments." But if we adopt
this definition, the same proposition will be necessary or contingent
according as we choose one or other of its terms as the argument to
our propositional function. For example, "if Socrates is a man,
Socrates is mortal," is necessary if Socrates is chosen as argument,
but not if _man_ or _mortal_ is chosen. Again, "if Socrates is a man,
Plato is mortal," will be necessary if either Socrates or _man_ is
chosen as argument, but not if Plato or _mortal_ is chosen. However,
this difficulty can be overcome by specifying the constituent which is
to be regarded as argument, and we thus arrive at the following
definition:

"A proposition is _necessary_ with respect to a given constituent if
it remains true when that constituent is altered in any way compatible
with the proposition remaining significant."

We may now apply this definition to the definition of causality quoted
above. It is obvious that the argument must be the time at which the
earlier event occurs. Thus an instance of causality will be such as:
"If the event [Math: e_{1}] occurs at the time [Math: t_{1}], it will
be followed by the event [Math: e_{2}]." This proposition is intended
to be necessary with respect to [Math: t_{1}], i.e. to remain true
however [Math: t_{1}] may be varied. Causality, as a universal law,
will then be the following: "Given any event [Math: t_{1}], there is
an event [Math: e_{2}] such that, whenever [Math: t_{1}] occurs,
[Math: e_{2}] occurs later." But before this can be considered
precise, we must specify how much later [Math: e_{2}] is to occur.
Thus the principle becomes:--

"Given any event [Math: e_{1}], there is an event [Math: e_{2}] and a
time-interval  such that, whenever [Math: e_{1}] occurs, [Math:
e_{2}] follows after an interval ."

I am not concerned as yet to consider whether this law is true or
false. For the present, I am merely concerned to discover what the law
of causality is supposed to be. I pass, therefore, to the other
definitions quoted above.

The second definition need not detain us long, for two reasons. First,
because it is psychological: not the "thought or perception" of a
process, but the process itself, must be what concerns us in
considering causality. Secondly, because it is circular: in speaking
of a process as "taking place in consequence of" another process, it
introduces the very notion of cause which was to be defined.

The third definition is by far the most precise; indeed as regards
clearness it leaves nothing to be desired. But a great difficulty is
caused by the temporal contiguity of cause and effect which the
definition asserts. No two instants are contiguous, since the
time-series is compact; hence either the cause or the effect or both
must, if the definition is correct, endure for a finite time; indeed,
by the wording of the definition it is plain that both are assumed to
endure for a finite time. But then we are faced with a dilemma: if the
cause is a process involving change within itself, we shall require
(if causality is universal) causal relations between its earlier and
later parts; moreover, it would seem that only the later parts can be
relevant to the effect, since the earlier parts are not contiguous to
the effect, and therefore (by the definition) cannot influence the
effect. Thus we shall be led to diminish the duration of the cause
without limit, and however much we may diminish it, there will still
remain an earlier part which might be altered without altering the
effect, so that the true cause, as defined, will not have been
reached, for it will be observed that the definition excludes
plurality of causes. If, on the other hand, the cause is purely
static, involving no change within itself, then, in the first place,
no such cause is to be found in nature, and in the second place, it
seems strange--too strange to be accepted, in spite of bare logical
possibility--that the cause, after existing placidly for some time,
should suddenly explode into the effect, when it might just as well
have done so at any earlier time, or have gone on unchanged without
producing its effect. This dilemma, therefore, is fatal to the view
that cause and effect can be contiguous in time; if there are causes
and effects, they must be separated by a finite time-interval , as
was assumed in the above interpretation of the first definition.

What is essentially the same statement of the law of causality as the
one elicited above from the first of Baldwin's definitions is given by
other philosophers. Thus John Stuart Mill says:--

"The Law of Causation, the recognition of which is the main pillar of
inductive science, is but the familiar truth, that invariability of
succession is found by observation to obtain between every fact in
nature and some other fact which has preceded it."[36]

And Bergson, who has rightly perceived that the law as stated by
philosophers is worthless, nevertheless continues to suppose that it
is used in science. Thus he says:--

"Now, it is argued, this law [the law of causality] means that every
phenomenon is determined by its conditions, or, in other words, that
the same causes produce the same effects."[37]

And again:--

"We perceive physical phenomena, and these phenomena obey laws. This
means: (1) That phenomena _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, previously perceived,
can occur again in the same shape; (2) that a certain phenomenon P,
which appeared after the conditions _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, and after
these conditions only, will not fail to recur as soon as the same
conditions are again present."[38]

A great part of Bergson's attack on science rests on the assumption
that it employs this principle. In fact, it employs no such principle,
but philosophers--even Bergson--are too apt to take their views on
science from each other, not from science. As to what the principle
is, there is a fair consensus among philosophers of different schools.
There are, however, a number of difficulties which at once arise. I
omit the question of plurality of causes for the present, since other
graver questions have to be considered. Two of these, which are forced
on our attention by the above statement of the law, are the
following:--

  (1) What is meant by an "event"?

  (2) How long may the time-interval be between cause and effect?

(1) An "event," in the statement of the law, is obviously intended to
be something that is likely to recur since otherwise the law becomes
trivial. It follows that an "event" is not a particular, but some
universal of which there may be many instances. It follows also that
an "event" must be something short of the whole state of the universe,
since it is highly improbable that this will recur. What is meant by
an "event" is something like striking a match, or dropping a penny
into the slot of an automatic machine. If such an event is to recur,
it must not be defined too narrowly: we must not state with what
degree of force the match is to be struck, nor what is to be the
temperature of the penny. For if such considerations were relevant,
our "event" would occur at most once, and the law would cease to give
information. An "event," then, is a universal defined sufficiently
widely to admit of many particular occurrences in time being instances
of it.

(2) The next question concerns the time-interval. Philosophers, no
doubt, think of cause and effect as contiguous in time, but this, for
reasons already given, is impossible. Hence, since there are no
infinitesimal time-intervals, there must be some finite lapse of time
 between cause and effect. This, however, at once raises insuperable
difficulties. However short we make the interval , something may
happen during this interval which prevents the expected result. I put
my penny in the slot, but before I can draw out my ticket there is an
earthquake which upsets the machine and my calculations. In order to
be sure of the expected effect, we must know that there is nothing in
the environment to interfere with it. But this means that the supposed
cause is not, by itself, adequate to insure the effect. And as soon as
we include the environment, the probability of repetition is
diminished, until at last, when the whole environment is included, the
probability of repetition becomes almost _nil_.

In spite of these difficulties, it must, of course, be admitted that
many fairly dependable regularities of sequence occur in daily life.
It is these regularities that have suggested the supposed law of
causality; where they are found to fail, it is thought that a better
formulation could have been found which would have never failed. I am
far from denying that there may be such sequences which in fact never
do fail. It may be that there will never be an exception to the rule
that when a stone of more than a certain mass, moving with more than a
certain velocity, comes in contact with a pane of glass of less than
a certain thickness, the glass breaks. I also do not deny that the
observation of such regularities, even when they are not without
exceptions, is useful in the infancy of a science: the observation
that unsupported bodies in air usually fall was a stage on the way to
the law of gravitation. What I deny is that science assumes the
existence of invariable uniformities of sequence of this kind, or that
it aims at discovering them. All such uniformities, as we saw, depend
upon a certain vagueness in the definition of the "events." That
bodies fall is a vague qualitative statement; science wishes to know
how fast they fall. This depends upon the shape of the bodies and the
density of the air. It is true that there is more nearly uniformity
when they fall in a vacuum; so far as Galileo could observe, the
uniformity is then complete. But later it appeared that even there the
latitude made a difference, and the altitude. Theoretically, the
position of the sun and moon must make a difference. In short, every
advance in a science takes us farther away from the crude uniformities
which are first observed, into greater differentiation of antecedent
and consequent, and into a continually wider circle of antecedents
recognised as relevant.

The principle "same cause, same effect," which philosophers imagine to
be vital to science, is therefore utterly otiose. As soon as the
antecedents have been given sufficiently fully to enable the
consequent to be calculated with some exactitude, the antecedents have
become so complicated that it is very unlikely they will ever recur.
Hence, if this were the principle involved, science would remain
utterly sterile.

The importance of these considerations lies partly in the fact that
they lead to a more correct account of scientific procedure, partly in
the fact that they remove the analogy with human volition which makes
the conception of cause such a fruitful source of fallacies. The
latter point will become clearer by the help of some illustrations.
For this purpose I shall consider a few maxims which have played a
great part in the history of philosophy.

(1) "Cause and effect must more or less resemble each other." This
principle was prominent in the philosophy of occasionalism, and is
still by no means extinct. It is still often thought, for example,
that mind could not have grown up in a universe which previously
contained nothing mental, and one ground for this belief is that
matter is too dissimilar from mind to have been able to cause it. Or,
more particularly, what are termed the nobler parts of our nature are
supposed to be inexplicable, unless the universe always contained
something at least equally noble which could cause them. All such
views seem to depend upon assuming some unduly simplified law of
causality; for, in any legitimate sense of "cause" and "effect,"
science seems to show that they are usually very widely dissimilar,
the "cause" being, in fact, two states of the whole universe, and the
"effect" some particular event.

(2) "Cause is analogous to volition, since there must be an
intelligible _nexus_ between cause and effect." This maxim is, I
think, often unconsciously in the imaginations of philosophers who
would reject it when explicitly stated. It is probably operative in
the view we have just been considering, that mind could not have
resulted from a purely material world. I do not profess to know what
is meant by "intelligible"; it seems to mean "familiar to
imagination." Nothing is less "intelligible," in any other sense, than
the connection between an act of will and its fulfilment. But
obviously the sort of nexus desired between cause and effect is such
as could only hold between the "events" which the supposed law of
causality contemplates; the laws which replace causality in such a
science as physics leave no room for any two events between which a
nexus could be sought.

(3) "The cause _compels_ the effect in some sense in which the effect
does not compel the cause." This belief seems largely operative in the
dislike of determinism; but, as a matter of fact, it is connected with
our second maxim, and falls as soon as that is abandoned. We may
define "compulsion" as follows: "Any set of circumstances is said to
compel A when A desires to do something which the circumstances
prevent, or to abstain from something which the circumstances cause."
This presupposes that some meaning has been found for the word
"cause"--a point to which I shall return later. What I want to make
clear at present is that compulsion is a very complex notion,
involving thwarted desire. So long as a person does what he wishes to
do, there is no compulsion, however much his wishes may be calculable
by the help of earlier events. And where desire does not come in,
there can be no question of compulsion. Hence it is, in general,
misleading to regard the cause as compelling the effect.

A vaguer form of the same maxim substitutes the word "determine" for
the word "compel"; we are told that the cause _determines_ the effect
in a sense in which the effect does not _determine_ the cause. It is
not quite clear what is meant by "determining"; the only precise
sense, so far as I know, is that of a function or one-many relation.
If we admit plurality of causes, but not of effects, that is, if we
suppose that, given the cause, the effect must be such and such, but,
given the effect, the cause may have been one of many alternatives,
then we may say that the cause determines the effect, but not the
effect the cause. Plurality of causes, however, results only from
conceiving the effect vaguely and narrowly and the cause precisely and
widely. Many antecedents may "cause" a man's death, because his death
is vague and narrow. But if we adopt the opposite course, taking as
the "cause" the drinking of a dose of arsenic, and as the "effect" the
whole state of the world five minutes later, we shall have plurality
of effects instead of plurality of causes. Thus the supposed lack of
symmetry between "cause" and "effect" is illusory.

(4) "A cause cannot operate when it has ceased to exist, because what
has ceased to exist is nothing." This is a common maxim, and a still
more common unexpressed prejudice. It has, I fancy, a good deal to do
with the attractiveness of Bergson's "_dure_": since the past has
effects now, it must still exist in some sense. The mistake in this
maxim consists in the supposition that causes "operate" at all. A
volition "operates" when what it wills takes place; but nothing can
operate except a volition. The belief that causes "operate" results
from assimilating them, consciously or unconsciously, to volitions. We
have already seen that, if there are causes at all, they must be
separated by a finite interval of time from their effects, and thus
cause their effects after they have ceased to exist.

It may be objected to the above definition of a volition "operating"
that it only operates when it "causes" what it wills, not when it
merely happens to be followed by what it wills. This certainly
represents the usual view of what is meant by a volition "operating,"
but as it involves the very view of causation which we are engaged in
combating, it is not open to us as a definition. We may say that a
volition "operates" when there is some law in virtue of which a
similar volition in rather similar circumstances will usually be
followed by what it wills. But this is a vague conception, and
introduces ideas which we have not yet considered. What is chiefly
important to notice is that the usual notion of "operating" is not
open to us if we reject, as I contend that we should, the usual notion
of causation.

(5) "A cause cannot operate except where it is." This maxim is very
widespread; it was urged against Newton, and has remained a source of
prejudice against "action at a distance." In philosophy it has led to
a denial of transient action, and thence to monism or Leibnizian
monadism. Like the analogous maxim concerning temporal contiguity, it
rests upon the assumption that causes "operate," i.e. that they are in
some obscure way analogous to volitions. And, as in the case of
temporal contiguity, the inferences drawn from this maxim are wholly
groundless.

I return now to the question, What law or laws can be found to take
the place of the supposed law of causality?

First, without passing beyond such uniformities of sequence as are
contemplated by the traditional law, we may admit that, if any such
sequence has been observed in a great many cases, and has never been
found to fail, there is an inductive probability that it will be found
to hold in future cases. If stones have hitherto been found to break
windows, it is probable that they will continue to do so. This, of
course, assumes the inductive principle, of which the truth may
reasonably be questioned; but as this principle is not our present
concern, I shall in this discussion treat it as indubitable. We may
then say, in the case of any such frequently observed sequence, that
the earlier event is the _cause_ and the later event the _effect_.

Several considerations, however, make such special sequences very
different from the traditional relation of cause and effect. In the
first place, the sequence, in any hitherto unobserved instance, is no
more than probable, whereas the relation of cause and effect was
supposed to be necessary. I do not mean by this merely that we are not
sure of having discovered a true case of cause and effect; I mean
that, even when we have a case of cause and effect in our present
sense, all that is meant is that on grounds of observation, it is
probable that when one occurs the other will also occur. Thus in our
present sense, A may be the cause of B even if there actually are
cases where B does not follow A. Striking a match will be the cause of
its igniting, in spite of the fact that some matches are damp and fail
to ignite.

In the second place, it will not be assumed that _every_ event has
some antecedent which is its cause in this sense; we shall only
believe in causal sequences where we find them, without any
presumption that they always are to be found.

In the third place, _any_ case of sufficiently frequent sequence will
be causal in our present sense; for example, we shall not refuse to
say that night is the cause of day. Our repugnance to saying this
arises from the ease with which we can imagine the sequence to fail,
but owing to the fact that cause and effect must be separated by a
finite interval of time, _any_ such sequence _might_ fail through the
interposition of other circumstances in the interval. Mill, discussing
this instance of night and day, says:--

"It is necessary to our using the word cause, that we should believe
not only that the antecedent always _has_ been followed by the
consequent, but that as long as the present constitution of things
endures, it always _will_ be so."[39]

In this sense, we shall have to give up the hope of finding causal
laws such as Mill contemplated; any causal sequence which we have
observed may at any moment be falsified without a falsification of any
laws of the kind that the more advanced sciences aim at establishing.

In the fourth place, such laws of probable sequence, though useful in
daily life and in the infancy of a science, tend to be displaced by
quite different laws as soon as a science is successful. The law of
gravitation will illustrate what occurs in any advanced science. In
the motions of mutually gravitating bodies, there is nothing that can
be called a cause, and nothing that can be called an effect; there is
merely a formula. Certain differential equations can be found, which
hold at every instant for every particle of the system, and which,
given the configuration and velocities at one instant, or the
configurations at two instants, render the configuration at any other
earlier or later instant theoretically calculable. That is to say, the
configuration at any instant is a function of that instant and the
configurations at two given instants. This statement holds throughout
physics, and not only in the special case of gravitation. But there is
nothing that could be properly called "cause" and nothing that could
be properly called "effect" in such a system.

No doubt the reason why the old "law of causality" has so long
continued to pervade the books of philosophers is simply that the idea
of a function is unfamiliar to most of them, and therefore they seek
an unduly simplified statement. There is no question of repetitions of
the "same" cause producing the "same" effect; it is not in any
sameness of causes and effects that the constancy of scientific law
consists, but in sameness of relations. And even "sameness of
relations" is too simple a phrase; "sameness of differential
equations" is the only correct phrase. It is impossible to state this
accurately in non-mathematical language; the nearest approach would be
as follows: "There is a constant relation between the state of the
universe at any instant and the rate of change in the rate at which
any part of the universe is changing at that instant, and this
relation is many-one, i.e. such that the rate of change in the rate of
change is determinate when the state of the universe is given." If the
"law of causality" is to be something actually discoverable in the
practice of science, the above proposition has a better right to the
name than any "law of causality" to be found in the books of
philosophers.

In regard to the above principle, several observations must be made--

(1) No one can pretend that the above principle is _a priori_ or
self-evident or a "necessity of thought." Nor is it, in any sense, a
premiss of science: it is an empirical generalisation from a number of
laws which are themselves empirical generalisations.

(2) The law makes no difference between past and future: the future
"determines" the past in exactly the same sense in which the past
"determines" the future. The word "determine," here, has a purely
logical significance: a certain number of variables "determine"
another variable if that other variable is a function of them.

(3) The law will not be empirically verifiable unless the course of
events within some sufficiently small volume will be approximately
the same in any two states of the universe which only differ in regard
to what is at a considerable distance from the small volume in
question. For example, motions of planets in the solar system must be
approximately the same however the fixed stars may be distributed,
provided that all the fixed stars are very much farther from the sun
than the planets are. If gravitation varied directly as the distance,
so that the most remote stars made the most difference to the motions
of the planets, the world might be just as regular and just as much
subject to mathematical laws as it is at present, but we could never
discover the fact.

(4) Although the old "law of causality" is not assumed by science,
something which we may call the "uniformity of nature" is assumed, or
rather is accepted on inductive grounds. The uniformity of nature does
not assert the trivial principle "same cause, same effect," but the
principle of the permanence of laws. That is to say, when a law
exhibiting, e.g. an acceleration as a function of the configuration
has been found to hold throughout the observable past, it is expected
that it will continue to hold in the future, or that, if it does not
itself hold, there is some other law, agreeing with the supposed law
as regards the past, which will hold for the future. The ground of
this principle is simply the inductive ground that it has been found
to be true in very many instances; hence the principle cannot be
considered certain, but only probable to a degree which cannot be
accurately estimated.

The uniformity of nature, in the above sense, although it is assumed
in the practice of science, must not, in its generality, be regarded
as a kind of major premiss, without which all scientific reasoning
would be in error. The assumption that _all_ laws of nature are
permanent has, of course, less probability than the assumption that
this or that particular law is permanent; and the assumption that a
particular law is permanent for all time has less probability than the
assumption that it will be valid up to such and such a date. Science,
in any given case, will assume what the case requires, but no more. In
constructing the _Nautical Almanac_ for 1915 it will assume that the
law of gravitation will remain true up to the end of that year; but it
will make no assumption as to 1916 until it comes to the next volume
of the almanac. This procedure is, of course, dictated by the fact
that the uniformity of nature is not known _a priori_, but is an
empirical generalisation, like "all men are mortal." In all such
cases, it is better to argue immediately from the given particular
instances to the new instance, than to argue by way of a major
premiss; the conclusion is only probable in either case, but acquires
a higher probability by the former method than by the latter.

In all science we have to distinguish two sorts of laws: first, those
that are empirically verifiable but probably only approximate;
secondly, those that are not verifiable, but may be exact. The law of
gravitation, for example, in its applications to the solar system, is
only empirically verifiable when it is assumed that matter outside the
solar system may be ignored for such purposes; we believe this to be
only approximately true, but we cannot empirically verify the law of
universal gravitation which we believe to be exact. This point is very
important in connection with what we may call "relatively isolated
systems." These may be defined as follows:--

A system relatively isolated during a given period is one which,
within some assignable margin of error, will behave in the same way
throughout that period, however the rest of the universe may be
constituted.

A system may be called "practically isolated" during a given period
if, although there _might_ be states of the rest of the universe which
would produce more than the assigned margin of error, there is reason
to believe that such states do not in fact occur.

Strictly speaking, we ought to specify the respect in which the system
is relatively isolated. For example, the earth is relatively isolated
as regards falling bodies, but not as regards tides; it is
_practically_ isolated as regards economic phenomena, although, if
Jevons' sunspot theory of commercial crises had been true, it would
not have been even practically isolated in this respect.

It will be observed that we cannot prove in advance that a system is
isolated. This will be inferred from the observed fact that
approximate uniformities can be stated for this system alone. If the
complete laws for the whole universe were known, the isolation of a
system could be deduced from them; assuming, for example, the law of
universal gravitation, the practical isolation of the solar system in
this respect can be deduced by the help of the fact that there is very
little matter in its neighbourhood. But it should be observed that
isolated systems are only important as providing a possibility of
_discovering_ scientific laws; they have no theoretical importance in
the finished structure of a science.

The case where one event A is said to "cause" another event B, which
philosophers take as fundamental, is really only the most simplified
instance of a practically isolated system. It may happen that, as a
result of general scientific laws, whenever A occurs throughout a
certain period, it is followed by B; in that case, A and B form a
system which is practically isolated throughout that period. It is,
however, to be regarded as a piece of good fortune if this occurs; it
will always be due to special circumstances, and would not have been
true if the rest of the universe had been different though subject to
the same laws.

The essential function which causality has been supposed to perform is
the possibility of inferring the future from the past, or, more
generally, events at any time from events at certain assigned times.
Any system in which such inference is possible may be called a
"deterministic" system. We may define a deterministic system as
follows:--

  A system is said to be "deterministic" when, given certain data,
  [Math: e_{1}, e_{2}, ..., e_{n}, at times t_{1}, t_{2}, ...,
  t_{n}] respectively, concerning this system, if [Math: E_{t}] is
  the state of the system at any time _t_, there is a functional
  relation of the form

[Math: E_{t} = f (e_{1}, t_{1}, e_{2}, t_{2}, ..., e_{n}, t_{n}, t)]. (A)

  The system will be "deterministic throughout a given period" if
  _t_, in the above formula, may be any time within that period,
  though outside that period the formula may be no longer true. If
  the universe, as a whole, is such a system, determinism is true of
  the universe; if not, not. A system which is part of a
  deterministic system I shall call "determined"; one which is not
  part of any such system I shall call "capricious."

The events [Math: e_{1}, e_{2}, ..., e_{n}] I shall call "determinants"
of the system. It is to be observed that a system which has one set of
determinants will in general have many. In the case of the motions of
the planets, for example, the configurations of the solar system at any
two given times will be determinants.

We may take another illustration from the hypothesis of
psycho-physical parallelism. Let us assume, for the purposes of this
illustration, that to a given state of brain a given state of mind
always corresponds, and vice versa, i.e. that there is a one-one
relation between them, so that each is a function of the other. We may
also assume, what is practically certain, that to a given state of a
certain brain a given state of the whole material universe
corresponds, since it is highly improbable that a given brain is ever
twice in exactly the same state. Hence there will be a one-one
relation between the state of a given person's mind and the state of
the whole material universe. It follows that, if _n_ states of the
material universe are determinants of the material universe, then _n_
states of a given man's mind are determinants of the whole material
and mental universe--assuming, that is to say, that psycho-physical
parallelism is true.

The above illustration is important in connection with a certain
confusion which seems to have beset those who have philosophised on
the relation of mind and matter. It is often thought that, if the
state of the mind is determinate when the state of the brain is given,
and if the material world forms a deterministic system, then mind is
"subject" to matter in some sense in which matter is not "subject" to
mind. But if the state of the brain is also determinate when the state
of the mind is given, it must be exactly as true to regard matter as
subject to mind as it would be to regard mind as subject to matter. We
could, theoretically, work out the history of mind without ever
mentioning matter, and then, at the end, deduce that matter must
meanwhile have gone through the corresponding history. It is true that
if the relation of brain to mind were many-one, not one-one, there
would be a one-sided dependence of mind on brain, while conversely, if
the relation were one-many, as Bergson supposes, there would be a
one-aided dependence of brain on mind. But the dependence involved is,
in any case, only logical; it does not mean that we shall be
compelled to do things we desire not to do, which is what people
instinctively imagine it to mean.

As another illustration we may take the case of mechanism and
teleology. A system may be defined as "mechanical" when it has a set
of determinants that are purely material, such as the positions of
certain pieces of matter at certain times. It is an open question
whether the world of mind and matter, as we know it, is a mechanical
system or not; let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that it is a
mechanical system. This supposition--so I contend--throws no light
whatever on the question whether the universe is or is not a
"teleological" system. It is difficult to define accurately what is
meant by a "teleological" system, but the argument is not much
affected by the particular definition we adopt. Broadly, a
teleological system is one in which purposes are realised, i.e. in
which certain desires--those that are deeper or nobler or more
fundamental or more universal or what not--are followed by their
realisation. Now the fact--if it be a fact--that the universe is
mechanical has no bearing whatever on the question whether it is
teleological in the above sense. There might be a mechanical system in
which all wishes were realised, and there might be one in which all
wishes were thwarted. The question whether, or how far, our actual
world is teleological, cannot, therefore, be settled by proving that
it is mechanical, and the desire that it should be teleological is no
ground for wishing it to be not mechanical.

There is, in all these questions, a very great difficulty in avoiding
confusion between what we can infer and what is in fact determined.
Let us consider, for a moment, the various senses in which the future
may be "determined." There is one sense--and a very important one--in
which it is determined quite independently of scientific laws, namely,
the sense that it will be what it will be. We all regard the past as
determined simply by the fact that it has happened; but for the
accident that memory works backward and not forward, we should regard
the future as equally determined by the fact that it will happen.
"But," we are told, "you cannot alter the past, while you can to some
extent alter the future." This view seems to me to rest upon just
those errors in regard to causation which it has been my object to
remove. You cannot make the past other than it was--true, but this is
a mere application of the law of contradiction. If you already know
what the past was, obviously it is useless to wish it different. But
also you cannot make the future other than it will be; this again is
an application of the law of contradiction. And if you happen to know
the future--e.g. in the case of a forthcoming eclipse--it is just as
useless to wish it different as to wish the past different. "But," it
will be rejoined, "our wishes can _cause_ the future, sometimes, to be
different from what it would be if they did not exist, and they can
have no such effect upon the past." This, again, is a mere tautology.
An effect being _defined_ as something subsequent to its cause,
obviously we can have no _effect_ upon the past. But that does not
mean that the past would not have been different if our present wishes
had been different. Obviously, our present wishes are conditioned by
the past, and therefore could not have been different unless the past
had been different; therefore, if our present wishes were different,
the past would be different. Of course, the past cannot be different
from what it was, but no more can our present wishes be different from
what they are; this again is merely the law of contradiction. The
facts seem to be merely (1) that wishing generally depends upon
ignorance, and is therefore commoner in regard to the future than in
regard to the past; (2) that where a wish concerns the future, it and
its realisation very often form a "practically independent system,"
i.e. many wishes regarding the future are realised. But there seems no
doubt that the main difference in our feelings arises from the
accidental fact that the past but not the future can be known by
memory.

Although the sense of "determined" in which the future is determined
by the mere fact that it will be what it will be is sufficient (at
least so it seems to me) to refute some opponents of determinism,
notably M. Bergson and the pragmatists, yet it is not what most people
have in mind when they speak of the future as determined. What they
have in mind is a formula by means of which the future can be
exhibited, and at least theoretically calculated, as a function of the
past. But at this point we meet with a great difficulty, which besets
what has been said above about deterministic systems, as well as what
is said by others.

If formul of any degree of complexity, however great, are admitted,
it would seem that any system, whose state at a given moment is a
function of certain measurable quantities, must be a deterministic
system. Let us consider, in illustration, a single material particle,
whose co-ordinates at time _t_ are [Math: x_{t}, y_{t}, z_{t}]. Then,
however, the particle moves, there must be, theoretically, functions
[Math: f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}], such that

[Math: x_{t} = f_{t}(t), y_{t} = f_{2}(t), z_{t} = f_{3}(t).]

It follows that, theoretically, the whole state of the material
universe at time _t_ must be capable of being exhibited as a function
of _t_. Hence our universe will be deterministic in the sense defined
above. But if this be true, no information is conveyed about the
universe in stating that it is deterministic. It is true that the
formul involved may be of strictly infinite complexity, and therefore
not practically capable of being written down or apprehended. But
except from the point of view of our knowledge, this might seem to be
a detail: in itself, if the above considerations are sound, the
material universe _must_ be deterministic, _must_ be subject to laws.

This, however, is plainly not what was intended. The difference
between this view and the view intended may be seen as follows. Given
some formula which fits the facts hitherto--say the law of
gravitation--there will be an infinite number of other formul, not
empirically distinguishable from it in the past, but diverging from it
more and more in the future. Hence, even assuming that there are
persistent laws, we shall have no reason for assuming that the law of
the inverse square will hold in future; it may be some other hitherto
indistinguishable law that will hold. We cannot say that _every_ law
which has held hitherto must hold in the future, because past facts
which obey one law will also obey others, hitherto indistinguishable
but diverging in future. Hence there must, at every moment, be laws
hitherto unbroken which are now broken for the first time. What
science does, in fact, is to select the _simplest_ formula that will
fit the facts. But this, quite obviously, is merely a methodological
precept, not a law of Nature. If the simplest formula ceases, after a
time, to be applicable, the simplest formula that remains applicable
is selected, and science has no sense that an axiom has been
falsified. We are thus left with the brute fact that, in many
departments of science, quite simple laws have hitherto been found to
hold. This fact cannot be regarded as having any _a priori_ ground,
nor can it be used to support inductively the opinion that the same
laws will continue; for at every moment laws hitherto true are being
falsified, though in the advanced sciences these laws are less simple
than those that have remained true. Moreover it would be fallacious to
argue inductively from the state of the advanced sciences to the
future state of the others, for it may well be that the advanced
sciences are advanced simply because, hitherto, their subject-matter
has obeyed simple and easily ascertainable laws, while the
subject-matter of other sciences has not done so.

The difficulty we have been considering seems to be met partly, if not
wholly, by the principle that the _time_ must not enter explicitly
into our formul. All mechanical laws exhibit acceleration as a
function of configuration, not of configuration and time jointly; and
this principle of the irrelevance of the time may be extended to all
scientific laws. In fact we might interpret the "uniformity of nature"
as meaning just this, that no scientific law involves the time as an
argument, unless, of course, it is given in an integrated form, in
which case _lapse_ of time, though not absolute time, may appear in
our formul. Whether this consideration suffices to overcome our
difficulty completely, I do not know; but in any case it does much to
diminish it.

It will serve to illustrate what has been said if we apply it to the
question of free will.

(1) Determinism in regard to the will is the doctrine that our
volitions belong to some deterministic system, i.e. are "determined"
in the sense defined above. Whether this doctrine is true or false, is
a mere question of fact; no _a priori_ considerations (if our previous
discussions have been correct) can exist on either side. On the one
hand, there is no _a priori_ category of causality, but merely certain
observed uniformities. As a matter of fact, there are observed
uniformities in regard to volitions; thus there is some empirical
evidence that volitions are determined. But it would be very rash to
maintain that the evidence is overwhelming, and it is quite possible
that some volitions, as well as some other things, are not determined,
except in the sense in which we found that everything must be
determined.

(2) But, on the other hand, the subjective sense of freedom, sometimes
alleged against determinism, has no bearing on the question whatever.
The view that it has a bearing rests upon the belief that causes
compel their effects, or that nature enforces obedience to its laws as
governments do. These are mere anthropomorphic superstitions, due to
assimilation of causes with volitions and of natural laws with human
edicts. We feel that our will is not compelled, but that only means
that it is not other than we choose it to be. It is one of the
demerits of the traditional theory of causality that it has created an
artificial opposition between determinism and the freedom of which we
are introspectively conscious.

(3) Besides the general question whether volitions are determined,
there is the further question whether they are _mechanically_
determined, i.e. whether they are part of what was above defined as a
mechanical system. This is the question whether they form part of a
system with purely material determinants, i.e. whether there are laws
which, given certain material data, make all volitions functions of
those data. Here again, there is empirical evidence up to a point, but
it is not conclusive in regard to all volitions. It is important to
observe, however that even if volitions are part of a mechanical
system, this by no means implies any supremacy of matter over mind. It
may well be that the same system which is susceptible of material
determinants is also susceptible of mental determinants; thus a
mechanical system may be determined by sets of volitions, as well as
by sets of material facts. It would seem, therefore, that the reasons
which make people dislike the view that volitions are mechanically
determined are fallacious.

(4) The notion of _necessity_, which is often associated with
determinism, is a confused notion not legitimately deducible from
determinism. Three meanings are commonly confounded when necessity is
spoken of:--

() An _action_ is necessary when it will be performed however much
the agent may wish to do otherwise. Determinism does not imply that
actions are necessary in this sense.

() A _propositional function_ is necessary when all its values are
true. This sense is not relevant to our present discussion.

() A _proposition_ is necessary with respect to a given constituent
when it is the value, with that constituent as argument, of a
necessary propositional function, in other words, when it remains true
however that constituent may be varied. In this sense, in a
deterministic system, the connection of a volition with its
determinants is necessary, if the time at which the determinants occur
be taken as the constituent to be varied, the time-interval between
the determinants and the volition being kept constant. But this sense
of necessity is purely logical, and has no emotional importance.

We may now sum up our discussion of causality. We found first that the
law of causality, as usually stated by philosophers, is false, and is
not employed in science. We then considered the nature of scientific
laws, and found that, instead of stating that one event A is always
followed by another event B, they stated functional relations between
certain events at certain times, which we called determinants, and
other events at earlier or later times or at the same time. We were
unable to find any _a priori_ category involved: the existence of
scientific laws appeared as a purely empirical fact, not necessarily
universal, except in a trivial and scientifically useless form. We
found that a system with one set of determinants may very likely have
other sets of a quite different kind, that, for example, a
mechanically determined system may also be teleologically or
volitionally determined. Finally we considered the problem of free
will: here we found that the reasons for supposing volitions to be
determined are strong but not conclusive, and we decided that even if
volitions are mechanically determined, that is no reason for denying
freedom in the sense revealed by introspection, or for supposing that
mechanical events are not determined by volitions. The problem of free
will _versus_ determinism is therefore, if we were right, mainly
illusory, but in part not yet capable of being decisively solved.

FOOTNOTES:

[35] A propositional function is an expression containing a variable,
or undetermined constituent, and becoming a proposition as soon as a
definite value is assigned to the variable. Examples are: "A is A,"
"_x_ is a number." The variable is called the _argument_ of the
function.

[36] _Logic_, Bk. III, Chap. V,  2.

[37] _Time and Free Will_, p. 199.

[38] _Time and Free Will._ p. 202.

[39] _Loc. cit._,  6




X

KNOWLEDGE BY ACQUAINTANCE AND KNOWLEDGE BY DESCRIPTION


The object of the following paper is to consider what it is that we
know in cases where we know propositions about "the so-and-so" without
knowing who or what the so-and-so is. For example, I know that the
candidate who gets most votes will be elected, though I do not know
who is the candidate who will get most votes. The problem I wish to
consider is: What do we know in these cases, where the subject is
merely described? I have considered this problem elsewhere[40] from a
purely logical point of view; but in what follows I wish to consider
the question in relation to theory of knowledge as well as in relation
to logic, and in view of the above-mentioned logical discussions, I
shall in this paper make the logical portion as brief as possible.

In order to make clear the antithesis between "acquaintance" and
"description," I shall first of all try to explain what I mean by
"acquaintance." I say that I am _acquainted_ with an object when I
have a direct cognitive relation to that object, i.e. when I am
directly aware of the object itself. When I speak of a cognitive
relation here, I do not mean the sort of relation which constitutes
judgment, but the sort which constitutes presentation. In fact, I
think the relation of subject and object which I call acquaintance is
simply the converse of the relation of object and subject which
constitutes presentation. That is, to say that S has acquaintance with
O is essentially the same thing as to say that O is presented to S.
But the associations and natural extensions of the word _acquaintance_
are different from those of the word _presentation_. To begin with, as
in most cognitive words, it is natural to say that I am acquainted
with an object even at moments when it is not actually before my mind,
provided it has been before my mind, and will be again whenever
occasion arises. This is the same sense in which I am said to know
that 2+2=4 even when I am thinking of something else. In the second
place, the word _acquaintance_ is designed to emphasise, more than the
word _presentation_, the relational character of the fact with which
we are concerned. There is, to my mind, a danger that, in speaking of
presentation, we may so emphasise the object as to lose sight of the
subject. The result of this is either to lead to the view that there
is no subject, whence we arrive at materialism; or to lead to the view
that what is presented is part of the subject, whence we arrive at
idealism, and should arrive at solipsism but for the most desperate
contortions. Now I wish to preserve the dualism of subject and object
in my terminology, because this dualism seems to me a fundamental fact
concerning cognition. Hence I prefer the word _acquaintance_ because
it emphasises the need of a subject which is acquainted.

When we ask what are the kinds of objects with which we are
acquainted, the first and most obvious example is _sense-data_. When I
see a colour or hear a noise, I have direct acquaintance with the
colour or the noise. The sense-datum with which I am acquainted in
these cases is generally, if not always, complex. This is
particularly obvious in the case of sight. I do not mean, of course,
merely that the supposed physical object is complex, but that the
direct sensible object is complex and contains parts with spatial
relations. Whether it is possible to be aware of a complex without
being aware of its constituents is not an easy question, but on the
whole it would seem that there is no reason why it should not be
possible. This question arises in an acute form in connection with
self-consciousness, which we must now briefly consider.

In introspection, we seem to be immediately aware of varying
complexes, consisting of objects in various cognitive and conative
relations to ourselves. When I see the sun, it often happens that I
am aware of my seeing the sun, in addition to being aware of the sun;
and when I desire food, it often happens that I am aware of my desire
for food. But it is hard to discover any state of mind in which I am
aware of myself alone, as opposed to a complex of which I am a
constituent. The question of the nature of self-consciousness is too
large and too slightly connected with our subject, to be argued at
length here. It is difficult, but probably not impossible, to account
for plain facts if we assume that we do not have acquaintance with
ourselves. It is plain that we are not only _acquainted_ with the
complex "Self-acquainted-with-A," but we also _know_ the proposition
"I am acquainted with A." Now here the complex has been analysed, and
if "I" does not stand for something which is a direct object of
acquaintance, we shall have to suppose that "I" is something known by
description. If we wished to maintain the view that there is no
acquaintance with Self, we might argue as follows: We are acquainted
with _acquaintance_, and we know that it is a relation. Also we are
acquainted with a complex in which we perceive that acquaintance is
the relating relation. Hence we know that this complex must have a
constituent which is that which is acquainted, i.e. must have a
subject-term as well as an object-term. This subject-term we define
as "I." Thus "I" means "the subject-term in awarenesses of which _I_
am aware." But as a definition this cannot be regarded as a happy
effort. It would seem necessary, therefore, either to suppose that I
am acquainted with myself, and that "I," therefore, requires no
definition, being merely the proper name of a certain object, or to
find some other analysis of self-consciousness. Thus self-consciousness
cannot be regarded as throwing light on the question whether we can
know a complex without knowing its constituents. This question,
however, is not important for our present purposes, and I shall
therefore not discuss it further.

The awarenesses we have considered so far have all been awarenesses of
particular existents, and might all in a large sense be called
sense-data. For, from the point of view of theory of knowledge,
introspective knowledge is exactly on a level with knowledge derived
from sight or hearing. But, in addition to awareness of the above kind
of objects, which may be called awareness of _particulars_; we have
also (though not quite in the same sense) what may be called awareness
of _universals_. Awareness of universals is called _conceiving_, and a
universal of which we are aware is called a _concept_. Not only are we
aware of particular yellows, but if we have seen a sufficient number
of yellows and have sufficient intelligence, we are aware of the
universal _yellow_; this universal is the subject in such judgments as
"yellow differs from blue" or "yellow resembles blue less than green
does." And the universal yellow is the predicate in such judgments as
"this is yellow," where "this" is a particular sense-datum. And
universal relations, too, are objects of awarenesses; up and down,
before and after, resemblance, desire, awareness itself, and so on,
would seem to be all of them objects of which we can be aware.

In regard to relations, it might be urged that we are never aware of
the universal relation itself, but only of complexes in which it is a
constituent. For example, it may be said that we do not know directly
such a relation as _before_, though we understand such a proposition
as "this is before that," and may be directly aware of such a complex
as "this being before that." This view, however, is difficult to
reconcile with the fact that we often know propositions in which the
relation is the subject, or in which the relata are not definite given
objects, but "anything." For example, we know that if one thing is
before another, and the other before a third, then the first is before
the third; and here the things concerned are not definite things, but
"anything." It is hard to see how we could know such a fact about
"before" unless we were acquainted with "before," and not merely with
actual particular cases of one given object being before another given
object. And more directly: A judgment such as "this is before that,"
where this judgment is derived from awareness of a complex,
constitutes an analysis, and we should not understand the analysis if
we were not acquainted with the meaning of the terms employed. Thus we
must suppose that we are acquainted with the meaning of "before," and
not merely with instances of it.

There are thus at least two sorts of objects of which we are aware,
namely, particulars and universals. Among particulars I include all
existents, and all complexes of which one or more constituents are
existents, such as this-before-that, this-above-that,
the-yellowness-of-this. Among universals I include all objects of
which no particular is a constituent. Thus the disjunction
"universal-particular" includes all objects. We might also call it the
disjunction "abstract-concrete." It is not quite parallel with the
opposition "concept-percept," because things remembered or imagined
belong with particulars, but can hardly be called percepts. (On the
other hand, universals with which we are acquainted may be identified
with concepts.)

It will be seen that among the objects with which we are acquainted
are not included physical objects (as opposed to sense-data), nor
other people's minds. These things are known to us by what I call
"knowledge by description," which we must now consider.

By a "description" I mean any phrase of the form "a so-and-so" or "the
so-and-so." A phrase of the form "a so-and-so" I shall call an
"ambiguous" description; a phrase of the form "the so-and-so" (in the
singular) I shall call a "definite" description. Thus "a man" is an
ambiguous description, and "the man with the iron mask" is a definite
description. There are various problems connected with ambiguous
descriptions, but I pass them by, since they do not directly concern
the matter I wish to discuss. What I wish to discuss is the nature of
our knowledge concerning objects in cases where we know that there is
an object answering to a definite description, though we are not
_acquainted_ with any such object. This is a matter which is concerned
exclusively with _definite_ descriptions. I shall, therefore, in the
sequel, speak simply of "descriptions" when I mean "definite
descriptions." Thus a description will mean any phrase of the form
"the so-and-so" in the singular.

I shall say that an object is "known by description" when we know that
it is "_the_ so-and-so," i.e. when we know that there is one object,
and no more, having a certain property; and it will generally be
implied that we do not have knowledge of the same object by
acquaintance. We know that the man with the iron mask existed, and
many propositions are known about him; but we do not know who he was.
We know that the candidate who gets most votes will be elected, and in
this case we are very likely also acquainted (in the only sense in
which one can be acquainted with some one else) with the man who is,
in fact, the candidate who will get most votes, but we do not know
which of the candidates he is, i.e. we do not know any proposition of
the form "A is the candidate who will get most votes" where A is one
of the candidates by name. We shall say that we have "_merely_
descriptive knowledge" of the so-and-so when, although we know that
the so-and-so exists, and although we may possibly be acquainted with
the object which is, in fact, the so-and-so, yet we do not know any
proposition "_a_ is the so-and-so," where _a_ is something with which
we are acquainted.

When we say "the so-and-so exists," we mean that there is just one
object which is the so-and-so. The proposition "_a_ is the so-and-so"
means that _a_ has the property so-and-so, and nothing else has. "Sir
Joseph Larmor is the Unionist candidate" means "Sir Joseph Larmor is a
Unionist candidate, and no one else is." "The Unionist candidate
exists" means "some one is a Unionist candidate, and no one else is."
Thus, when we are acquainted with an object which we know to be the
so-and-so, we know that the so-and-so exists but we may know that the
so-and-so exists when we are not acquainted with any object which we
know to be the so-and-so, and even when we are not acquainted with any
object which, in fact, is the so-and-so.

Common words, even proper names, are usually really descriptions. That
is to say, the thought in the mind of a person using a proper name
correctly can generally only be expressed explicitly if we replace the
proper name by a description. Moreover, the description required to
express the thought will vary for different people, or for the same
person at different times. The only thing constant (so long as the
name is rightly used) is the object to which the name applies. But so
long as this remains constant, the particular description involved
usually makes no difference to the truth or falsehood of the
proposition in which the name appears.

Let us take some illustrations. Suppose some statement made about
Bismarck. Assuming that there is such a thing as direct acquaintance
with oneself, Bismarck himself might have used his name directly to
designate the particular person with whom he was acquainted. In this
case, if he made a judgment about himself, he himself might be a
constituent of the judgment. Here the proper name has the direct use
which it always wishes to have, as simply standing for a certain
object, and not for a description of the object. But if a person who
knew Bismarck made a judgment about him, the case is different. What
this person was acquainted with were certain sense-data which he
connected (rightly, we will suppose) with Bismarck's body. His body as
a physical object, and still more his mind, were only known as the
body and the mind connected with these sense-data. That is, they were
known by description. It is, of course, very much a matter of chance
which characteristics of a man's appearance will come into a friend's
mind when he thinks of him; thus the description actually in the
friend's mind is accidental. The essential point is that he knows that
the various descriptions all apply to the same entity, in spite of
not being acquainted with the entity in question.

When we, who did not know Bismarck, make a judgment about him, the
description in our minds will probably be some more or less vague mass
of historical knowledge--far more, in most cases, than is required to
identify him. But, for the sake of illustration, let us assume that we
think of him as "the first Chancellor of the German Empire." Here all
the words are abstract except "German." The word "German" will again
have different meanings for different people. To some it will recall
travels in Germany, to some the look of Germany on the map, and so on.
But if we are to obtain a description which we know to be applicable,
we shall be compelled, at some point, to bring in a reference to a
particular with which we are acquainted. Such reference is involved in
any mention of past, present, and future (as opposed to definite
dates), or of here and there, or of what others have told us. Thus it
would seem that, in some way or other, a description known to be
applicable to a particular must involve some reference to a particular
with which we are acquainted, if our knowledge about the thing
described is not to be merely what follows logically from the
description. For example, "the most long-lived of men" is a
description which must apply to some man, but we can make no judgments
concerning this man which involve knowledge about him beyond what the
description gives. If, however, we say, "the first Chancellor of the
German Empire was an astute diplomatist," we can only be assured of
the truth of our judgment in virtue of something with which we are
acquainted--usually a testimony heard or read. Considered
psychologically, apart from the information we convey to others, apart
from the fact about the actual Bismarck, which gives importance to
our judgment, the thought we really have contains the one or more
particulars involved, and otherwise consists wholly of concepts. All
names of places--London, England, Europe, the earth, the Solar
System--similarly involve, when used, descriptions which start from
some one or more particulars with which we are acquainted. I suspect
that even the Universe, as considered by metaphysics, involves such a
connection with particulars. In logic, on the contrary, where we are
concerned not merely with what does exist, but with whatever might or
could exist or be, no reference to actual particulars is involved.

It would seem that, when we make a statement about something only
known by description, we often _intend_ to make our statement, not in
the form involving the description, but about the actual thing
described. That is to say, when we say anything about Bismarck, we
should like, if we could, to make the judgment which Bismarck alone
can make, namely, the judgment of which he himself is a constituent.
In this we are necessarily defeated, since the actual Bismarck is
unknown to us. But we know that there is an object B called Bismarck,
and that B was an astute diplomatist. We can thus _describe_ the
proposition we should like to affirm, namely, "B was an astute
diplomatist," where B is the object which was Bismarck. What enables
us to communicate in spite of the varying descriptions we employ is
that we know there is a true proposition concerning the actual
Bismarck, and that, however we may vary the description (so long as
the description is correct), the proposition described is still the
same. This proposition, which is described and is known to be true, is
what interests us; but we are not acquainted with the proposition
itself, and do not know _it_, though we know it is true.

It will be seen that there are various stages in the removal from
acquaintance with particulars: there is Bismarck to people who knew
him, Bismarck to those who only know of him through history, the man
with the iron mask, the longest-lived of men. These are progressively
further removed from acquaintance with particulars, and there is a
similar hierarchy in the region of universals. Many universals, like
many particulars, are only known to us by description. But here, as in
the case of particulars, knowledge concerning what is known by
description is ultimately reducible to knowledge concerning what is
known by acquaintance.

The fundamental epistemological principle in the analysis of
propositions containing descriptions is this: _Every proposition which
we can understand must be composed wholly of constituents with which
we are acquainted._ From what has been said already, it will be plain
why I advocate this principle, and how I propose to meet the case of
propositions which at first sight contravene it. Let us begin with the
reasons for supposing the principle true.

The chief reason for supposing the principle true is that it seems
scarcely possible to believe that we can make a judgment or entertain
a supposition without knowing what it is that we are judging or
supposing about. If we make a judgment about (say) Julius Csar, it is
plain that the actual person who was Julius Csar is not a constituent
of the judgment. But before going further, it may be well to explain
what I mean when I say that this or that is a constituent of a
judgment, or of a proposition which we understand. To begin with
judgments: a judgment, as an occurrence, I take to be a relation of a
mind to several entities, namely, the entities which compose what is
judged. If, e.g. I judge that A loves B, the judgment as an event
consists in the existence, at a certain moment, of a specific
four-term relation, called _judging_, between me and A and love and B.
That is to say, at the time when I judge, there is a certain complex
whose terms are myself and A and love and B, and whose relating
relation is _judging_. My reasons for this view have been set forth
elsewhere,[41] and I shall not repeat them here. Assuming this view of
judgment, the constituents of the judgment are simply the constituents
of the complex which is the judgment. Thus, in the above case, the
constituents are myself and A and love and B and judging. But myself
and judging are constituents shared by all my judgments; thus the
_distinctive_ constituents of the particular judgment in question are
A and love and B. Coming now to what is meant by "understanding a
proposition," I should say that there is another relation possible
between me and A and love and B, which is called my _supposing_ that A
loves B.[42] When we can _suppose_ that A loves B, we "understand the
proposition" _A loves B_. Thus we often understand a proposition in
cases where we have not enough knowledge to make a judgment.
Supposing, like judging, is a many-term relation, of which a mind is
one term. The other terms of the relation are called the constituents
of the proposition supposed. Thus the principle which I enunciated may
be re-stated as follows: _Whenever a relation of supposing or judging
occurs, the terms to which the supposing or judging mind is related by
the relation of supposing or judging must be terms with which the mind
in question is acquainted._ This is merely to say that we cannot make
a judgment or a supposition without knowing what it is that we are
making our judgment or supposition about. It seems to me that the
truth of this principle is evident as soon as the principle is
understood; I shall, therefore, in what follows, assume the principle,
and use it as a guide in analysing judgments that contain
descriptions.

Returning now to Julius Csar, I assume that it will be admitted that
he himself is not a constituent of any judgment which I can make. But
at this point it is necessary to examine the view that judgments are
composed of something called "ideas," and that it is the "idea" of
Julius Csar that is a constituent of my judgment. I believe the
plausibility of this view rests upon a failure to form a right theory
of descriptions. We may mean by my "idea" of Julius Csar the things
that I know about him, e.g. that he conquered Gaul, was assassinated
on the Ides of March, and is a plague to schoolboys. Now I am
admitting, and indeed contending, that in order to discover what is
actually in my mind when I judge about Julius Csar, we must
substitute for the proper name a description made up of some of the
things I know about him. (A description which will often serve to
express my thought is "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_." For
whatever else I may have forgotten about him, it is plain that when I
mention him I have not forgotten that that was his name.) But although
I think the theory that judgments consist of ideas may have been
suggested in some such way, yet I think the theory itself is
fundamentally mistaken. The view seems to be that there is some
mental existent which may be called the "idea" of something outside
the mind of the person who has the idea, and that, since judgment is a
mental event, its constituents must be constituents of the mind of the
person judging. But in this view ideas become a veil between us and
outside things--we never really, in knowledge, attain to the things we
are supposed to be knowing about, but only to the ideas of those
things. The relation of mind, idea, and object, on this view, is
utterly obscure, and, so far as I can see, nothing discoverable by
inspection warrants the intrusion of the idea between the mind and the
object. I suspect that the view is fostered by the dislike of
relations, and that it is felt the mind could not know objects unless
there were something "in" the mind which could be called the state of
knowing the object. Such a view, however, leads at once to a vicious
endless regress, since the relation of idea to object will have to be
explained by supposing that the idea itself has an idea of the object,
and so on _ad infinitum_. I therefore see no reason to believe that,
when we are acquainted with an object, there is in us something which
can be called the "idea" of the object. On the contrary, I hold that
acquaintance is wholly a relation, not demanding any such constituent
of the mind as is supposed by advocates of "ideas." This is, of
course, a large question, and one which would take us far from our
subject if it were adequately discussed. I therefore content myself
with the above indications, and with the corollary that, in judging,
the actual objects concerning which we judge, rather than any supposed
purely mental entities, are constituents of the complex which is the
judgment.

When, therefore, I say that we must substitute for "Julius Csar" some
description of Julius Csar, in order to discover the meaning of a
judgment nominally about him, I am not saying that we must substitute
an idea. Suppose our description is "the man whose name was _Julius
Csar_." Let our judgment be "Julius Csar was assassinated." Then it
becomes "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_ was assassinated." Here
_Julius Csar_ is a noise or shape with which we are acquainted, and
all the other constituents of the judgment (neglecting the tense in
"was") are _concepts_ with which we are acquainted. Thus our judgment
is wholly reduced to constituents with which we are acquainted, but
Julius Csar himself has ceased to be a constituent of our judgment.
This, however, requires a proviso, to be further explained shortly,
namely that "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_" must not, as a
whole, be a constituent of our judgment, that is to say, this phrase
must not, as a whole, have a meaning which enters into the judgment.
Any right analysis of the judgment, therefore, must break up this
phrase, and not treat it as a subordinate complex which is part of the
judgment. The judgment "the man whose name was _Julius Csar_ was
assassinated" may be interpreted as meaning "one and only one man was
called _Julius Csar_, and that one was assassinated." Here it is
plain that there is no constituent corresponding to the phrase "the
man whose name was _Julius Csar_." Thus there is no reason to regard
this phrase as expressing a constituent of the judgment, and we have
seen that this phrase must be broken up if we are to be acquainted
with all the constituents of the judgment. This conclusion, which we
have reached from considerations concerned with the theory of
knowledge, is also forced upon us by logical considerations, which
must now be briefly reviewed.

It is common to distinguish two aspects, _meaning_ and _denotation_,
such phrases as "the author of Waverley." The meaning will be a
certain complex, consisting (at least) of authorship and Waverley with
some relation; the denotation will be Scott. Similarly "featherless
bipeds" will have a complex meaning, containing as constituents the
presence of two feet and the absence of feathers, while its denotation
will be the class of men. Thus when we say "Scott is the author of
Waverley" or "men are the same as featherless bipeds," we are
asserting an identity of denotation, and this assertion is worth
making because of the diversity of meaning.[43] I believe that the
duality of meaning and denotation, though capable of a true
interpretation, is misleading if taken as fundamental. The denotation,
I believe, is not a constituent of the proposition, except in the case
of proper names, i.e. of words which do not assign a property to an
object, but merely and solely name it. And I should hold further that,
in this sense, there are only two words which are strictly proper
names of particulars, namely, "I" and "this."[44]

One reason for not believing the denotation to be a constituent of the
proposition is that we may know the proposition even when we are not
acquainted with the denotation. The proposition "the author of
Waverley is a novelist" was known to people who did not know that "the
author of Waverley" denoted Scott. This reason has been already
sufficiently emphasised.

A second reason is that propositions concerning "the so-and-so" are
possible even when "the so-and-so" has no denotation. Take, e.g. "the
golden mountain does not exist" or "the round square is
self-contradictory." If we are to preserve the duality of meaning and
denotation, we have to say, with Meinong, that there are such objects
as the golden mountain and the round square, although these objects do
not have being. We even have to admit that the existent round square
is existent, but does not exist.[45] Meinong does not regard this as a
contradiction, but I fail to see that it is not one. Indeed, it seems
to me evident that the judgment "there is no such object as the round
square" does not presuppose that there is such an object. If this is
admitted, however, we are led to the conclusion that, by parity of
form, no judgment concerning "the so-and-so" actually involves the
so-and-so as a constituent.

Miss Jones[46] contends that there is no difficulty in admitting
contradictory predicates concerning such an object as "the present
King of France," on the ground that this object is in itself
contradictory. Now it might, of course, be argued that this object,
unlike the round square, is not self-contradictory, but merely
non-existent. This, however, would not go to the root of the matter.
The real objection to such an argument is that the law of
contradiction ought not to be stated in the traditional form "A is not
both B and not B," but in the form "no proposition is both true and
false." The traditional form only applies to certain propositions,
namely, to those which attribute a predicate to a subject. When the
law is stated of propositions, instead of being stated concerning
subjects and predicates, it is at once evident that propositions about
the present King of France or the round square can form no exception,
but are just as incapable of being both true and false as other
propositions. Miss Jones[47] argues that "Scott is the author of
Waverley" asserts identity of denotation between _Scott_ and _the
author of Waverley_. But there is some difficulty in choosing among
alternative meanings of this contention. In the first place, it should
be observed that _the author of Waverley_ is not a _mere_ name, like
_Scott_. _Scott_ is merely a noise or shape conventionally used to
designate a certain person; it gives us no information about that
person, and has nothing that can be called meaning as opposed to
denotation. (I neglect the fact, considered above, that even proper
names, as a rule, really stand for descriptions.) But _the author of
Waverley_ is not merely conventionally a name for Scott; the element
of mere convention belongs here to the separate words, _the_ and
_author_ and _of_ and _Waverley_. Given what these words stand for,
_the author of Waverley_ is no longer arbitrary. When it is said that
Scott is the author of Waverley, we are not stating that these are two
_names_ for one man, as we should be if we said "Scott is Sir Walter."
A man's name is what he is called, but however much Scott had been
called the author of Waverley, that would not have made him be the
author; it was necessary for him actually to write Waverley, which was
a fact having nothing to do with names.

If, then, we are asserting identity of denotation, we must not mean by
_denotation_ the mere relation of a name to the thing named. In fact,
it would be nearer to the truth to say that the _meaning_ of "Scott"
is the _denotation_ of "the author of Waverley." The relation of
"Scott" to Scott is that "Scott" means Scott, just as the relation of
"author" to the concept which is so called is that "author" means this
concept. Thus if we distinguish meaning and denotation in "the author
of Waverley," we shall have to say that "Scott" has meaning but not
denotation. Also when we say "Scott is the author of Waverley," the
_meaning_ of "the author of Waverley" is relevant to our assertion.
For if the denotation alone were relevant, any other phrase with the
same denotation would give the same proposition. Thus "Scott is the
author of Marmion" would be the same proposition as "Scott is the
author of Waverley." But this is plainly not the case, since from the
first we learn that Scott wrote Marmion and from the second we learn
that he wrote Waverley, but the first tells us nothing about Waverley
and the second nothing about Marmion. Hence the meaning of "the author
of Waverley," as opposed to the denotation, is certainly relevant to
"Scott is the author of Waverley."

We have thus agreed that "the author of Waverley" is not a mere name,
and that its meaning is relevant in propositions in which it occurs.
Thus if we are to say, as Miss Jones does, that "Scott is the author
of Waverley" asserts an identity of denotation, we must regard the
denotation of "the author of Waverley" as the denotation of what is
_meant_ by "the author of Waverley." Let us call the meaning of "the
author of Waverley" M. Thus M is what "the author of Waverley" means.
Then we are to suppose that "Scott is the author of Waverley" means
"Scott is the denotation of M." But here we are explaining our
proposition by another of the same form, and thus we have made no
progress towards a real explanation. "The denotation of M," like "the
author of Waverley," has both meaning and denotation, on the theory we
are examining. If we call its meaning M', our proposition becomes
"Scott is the denotation of M'." But this leads at once to an endless
regress. Thus the attempt to regard our proposition as asserting
identity of denotation breaks down, and it becomes imperative to find
some other analysis. When this analysis has been completed, we shall
be able to reinterpret the phrase "identity of denotation," which
remains obscure so long as it is taken as fundamental.

The first point to observe is that, in any proposition about "the
author of Waverley," provided Scott is not explicitly mentioned, the
denotation itself, i.e. Scott, does not occur, but only the concept of
denotation, which will be represented by a variable. Suppose we say
"the author of Waverley was the author of Marmion," we are certainly
not saying that both were Scott--we may have forgotten that there was
such a person as Scott. We are saying that there is some man who was
the author of Waverley and the author of Marmion. That is to say,
there is some one who wrote Waverley and Marmion, and no one else
wrote them. Thus the identity is that of a variable, i.e. of an
indefinite subject, "some one." This is why we can understand
propositions about "the author of Waverley," without knowing who he
was. When we say "the author of Waverley was a poet," we mean "one and
only one man wrote Waverley, and he was a poet"; when we say "the
author of Waverley was Scott" we mean "one and only one man wrote
Waverley, and he was Scott." Here the identity is between a variable,
i.e. an indeterminate subject ("he"), and Scott; "the author of
Waverley" has been analysed away, and no longer appears as a
constituent of the proposition.[48]

The reason why it is imperative to analyse away the phrase "the author
of Waverley" may be stated as follows. It is plain that when we say
"the author of Waverley is the author of Marmion," the _is_ expresses
identity. We have seen also that the common _denotation_, namely
Scott, is not a constituent of this proposition, while the _meanings_
(if any) of "the author of Waverley" and "the author of Marmion" are
not identical. We have seen also that, in any sense in which the
meaning of a word is a constituent of a proposition in whose verbal
expression the word occurs, "Scott" means the actual man Scott, in the
same sense (so far as concerns our present discussion) in which
"author" means a certain universal. Thus, if "the author of Waverley"
were a subordinate complex in the above proposition, its _meaning_
would have to be what was said to be identical with the _meaning_ of
"the author of Marmion." This is plainly not the case; and the only
escape is to say that "the author of Waverley" does not, by itself,
have a meaning, though phrases of which it is part do have a meaning.
That is, in a right analysis of the above proposition, "the author of
Waverley" must disappear. This is effected when the above proposition
is analysed as meaning: "Some one wrote Waverley and no one else did,
and that some one also wrote Marmion and no one else did." This may be
more simply expressed by saying that the propositional function "_x_
wrote Waverley and Marmion, and no one else did" is capable of truth,
i.e. some value of _x_ makes it true, but no other value does. Thus
the true subject of our judgment is a propositional function, i.e. a
complex containing an undetermined constituent, and becoming a
proposition as soon as this constituent is determined.

We may now define the denotation of a phrase. If we know that the
proposition "_a_ is the so-and-so" is true, i.e. that _a_ is so-and-so
and nothing else is, we call _a_ the denotation of the phrase "the
so-and-so." A very great many of the propositions we naturally make
about "the so-and-so" will remain true or remain false if we
substitute _a_ for "the so-and-so," where _a_ is the denotation of
"the so-and-so." Such propositions will also remain true or remain
false if we substitute for "the so-and-so" any other phrase having the
same denotation. Hence, as practical men, we become interested in the
denotation more than in the description, since the denotation decides
as to the truth or falsehood of so many statements in which the
description occurs. Moreover, as we saw earlier in considering the
relations of description and acquaintance, we often wish to reach the
denotation, and are only hindered by lack of acquaintance: in such
cases the description is merely the means we employ to get as near as
possible to the denotation. Hence it naturally comes to be supposed
that the denotation is part of the proposition in which the
description occurs. But we have seen, both on logical and on
epistemological grounds, that this is an error. The actual object (if
any) which is the denotation is not (unless it is explicitly
mentioned) a constituent of propositions in which descriptions occur;
and this is the reason why, in order to understand such propositions,
we need acquaintance with the constituents of the description, but do
not need acquaintance with its denotation. The first result of
analysis, when applied to propositions whose grammatical subject is
"the so-and-so," is to substitute a variable as subject; i.e. we
obtain a proposition of the form: "There is _something_ which alone is
so-and-so, and that _something_ is such-and-such." The further
analysis of propositions concerning "the so-and-so" is thus merged in
the problem of the nature of the variable, i.e. of the meanings of
_some_, _any_, and _all_. This is a difficult problem, concerning
which I do not intend to say anything at present.

To sum up our whole discussion. We began by distinguishing two sorts
of knowledge of objects, namely, knowledge by _acquaintance_ and
knowledge by _description_. Of these it is only the former that brings
the object itself before the mind. We have acquaintance with
sense-data, with many universals, and possibly with ourselves, but not
with physical objects or other minds. We have _descriptive_ knowledge
of an object when we know that it is _the_ object having some property
or properties with which we are acquainted; that is to say, when we
know that the property or properties in question belong to one object
and no more, we are said to have knowledge of that one object by
description, whether or not we are acquainted with the object. Our
knowledge of physical objects and of other minds is only knowledge by
description, the descriptions involved being usually such as involve
sense-data. All propositions intelligible to us, whether or not they
primarily concern things only known to us by description, are composed
wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted, for a constituent
with which we are not acquainted is unintelligible to us. A judgment,
we found, is not composed of mental constituents called "ideas," but
consists of an occurrence whose constituents are a mind[49] and
certain objects, particulars or universals. (One at least must be a
universal.) When a judgment is rightly analysed, the objects which are
constituents of it must all be objects with which the mind which is a
constituent of it is acquainted. This conclusion forces us to analyse
descriptive phrases occurring in propositions, and to say that the
objects denoted by such phrases are not constituents of judgments in
which such phrases occur (unless these objects are explicitly
mentioned). This leads us to the view (recommended also on purely
logical grounds) that when we say "the author of Marmion was the
author of Waverley," Scott himself is not a constituent of our
judgment, and that the judgment cannot be explained by saying that it
affirms identity of denotation with diversity of meaning. It also,
plainly, does not assert identity of meaning. Such judgments,
therefore, can only be analysed by breaking up the descriptive
phrases, introducing a variable, and making propositional functions
the ultimate subjects. In fact, "the so-and-so is such-and-such" will
mean that "_x_ is so-and-so and nothing else is, and _x_ is
such-and-such" is capable of truth. The analysis of such judgments
involves many fresh problems, but the discussion of these problems is
not undertaken in the present paper.

FOOTNOTES:

[40] See references later.

[41] _Philosophical Essays_, "The Nature of Truth." I have been
persuaded by Mr. Wittgenstein that this theory is somewhat unduly
simple, but the modification which I believe it to require does not
affect the above argument [1917].

[42] Cf. Meinong, _Ueber Annahmen_, _passim_. I formerly supposed,
contrary to Meinong's view, that the relationship of supposing might
be merely that of presentation. In this view I now think I was
mistaken, and Meinong is right. But my present view depends upon the
theory that both in judgment and in assumption there is no single
Objective, but the several constituents of the judgment or assumption
are in a many-term relation to the mind.

[43] This view has been recently advocated by Miss E.E.C. Jones. "A
New Law of Thought and its Implications," _Mind_, January, 1911.

[44] I should now exclude "I" from proper names in the strict sense,
and retain only "this" [1917].

[45] Meinong, _Ueber Annahmen_, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1910, p. 141.

[46] _Mind_, July, 1910, p. 380.

[47] _Mind_, July, 1910, p. 379.

[48] The theory which I am advocating is set forth fully, with the
logical grounds in its favour, in _Principia Mathematica_, Vol. I.
Introduction, Chap. III; also, less fully, in _Mind_, October, 1905.

[49] I use this phrase merely to denote the something psychological
which enters into judgment, without intending to prejudge the question
as to what this something is.
Produced by Dianne Bean





THE ANALYSIS OF MIND

By Bertrand Russell

1921




MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY


An admirable statement of the aims of the Library of Philosophy was
provided by the first editor, the late Professor J. H. Muirhead, in his
description of the original programme printed in Erdmann's History of
Philosophy under the date 1890. This was slightly modified in subsequent
volumes to take the form of the following statement:

"The Muirhead Library of Philosophy was designed as a contribution to
the History of Modern Philosophy under the heads: first of Different
Schools of Thought--Sensationalist, Realist, Idealist, Intuitivist;
secondly of different Subjects--Psychology, Ethics, Aesthetics,
Political Philosophy, Theology. While much had been done in England in
tracing the course of evolution in nature, history, economics, morals
and religion, little had been done in tracing the development of thought
on these subjects. Yet 'the evolution of opinion is part of the whole
evolution'.

"By the co-operation of different writers in carrying out this plan it
was hoped that a thoroughness and completeness of treatment, otherwise
unattainable, might be secured. It was believed also that from writers
mainly British and American fuller consideration of English Philosophy
than it had hitherto received might be looked for. In the earlier series
of books containing, among others, Bosanquet's "History of Aesthetic,"
Pfleiderer's "Rational Theology since Kant," Albee's "History of English
Utilitarianism," Bonar's "Philosophy and Political Economy," Brett's
"History of Psychology," Ritchie's "Natural Rights," these objects were
to a large extent effected.

"In the meantime original work of a high order was being produced both
in England and America by such writers as Bradley, Stout, Bertrand
Russell, Baldwin, Urban, Montague, and others, and a new interest in
foreign works, German, French and Italian, which had either become
classical or were attracting public attention, had developed. The scope
of the Library thus became extended into something more international,
and it is entering on the fifth decade of its existence in the hope that
it may contribute to that mutual understanding between countries which
is so pressing a need of the present time."

The need which Professor Muirhead stressed is no less pressing to-day,
and few will deny that philosophy has much to do with enabling us to
meet it, although no one, least of all Muirhead himself, would regard
that as the sole, or even the main, object of philosophy. As Professor
Muirhead continues to lend the distinction of his name to the Library
of Philosophy it seemed not inappropriate to allow him to recall us to
these aims in his own words. The emphasis on the history of thought also
seemed to me very timely; and the number of important works promised
for the Library in the very near future augur well for the continued
fulfilment, in this and other ways, of the expectations of the original
editor.

H. D. Lewis




PREFACE

This book has grown out of an attempt to harmonize two different
tendencies, one in psychology, the other in physics, with both of which
I find myself in sympathy, although at first sight they might seem
inconsistent. On the one hand, many psychologists, especially those
of the behaviourist school, tend to adopt what is essentially a
materialistic position, as a matter of method if not of metaphysics.
They make psychology increasingly dependent on physiology and external
observation, and tend to think of matter as something much more solid
and indubitable than mind. Meanwhile the physicists, especially Einstein
and other exponents of the theory of relativity, have been making
"matter" less and less material. Their world consists of "events," from
which "matter" is derived by a logical construction. Whoever reads, for
example, Professor Eddington's "Space, Time and Gravitation" (Cambridge
University Press, 1920), will see that an old-fashioned materialism can
receive no support from modern physics. I think that what has permanent
value in the outlook of the behaviourists is the feeling that physics is
the most fundamental science at present in existence. But this position
cannot be called materialistic, if, as seems to be the case, physics
does not assume the existence of matter.

The view that seems to me to reconcile the materialistic tendency of
psychology with the anti-materialistic tendency of physics is the view
of William James and the American new realists, according to which the
"stuff" of the world is neither mental nor material, but a "neutral
stuff," out of which both are constructed. I have endeavoured in this
work to develop this view in some detail as regards the phenomena with
which psychology is concerned.

My thanks are due to Professor John B. Watson and to Dr. T. P. Nunn
for reading my MSS. at an early stage and helping me with many valuable
suggestions; also to Mr. A. Wohlgemuth for much very useful information
as regards important literature. I have also to acknowledge the help
of the editor of this Library of Philosophy, Professor Muirhead, for
several suggestions by which I have profited.

The work has been given in the form of lectures both in London and
Peking, and one lecture, that on Desire, has been published in the
Athenaeum.

There are a few allusions to China in this book, all of which were
written before I had been in China, and are not intended to be taken by
the reader as geographically accurate. I have used "China" merely as
a synonym for "a distant country," when I wanted illustrations of
unfamiliar things.

Peking, January 1921.



CONTENTS

  I.   Recent Criticisms of "Consciousness"
  II.  Instinct and Habit
  III. Desire and Feeling
  IV.  Influence of Past History on Present Occurrences
            in Living Organisms
  V.   Psychological and Physical Causal Laws
  VI.  Introspection
  VII. The Definition of Perception
  VIII.Sensations and Images
  IX.  Memory
  X.   Words and Meaning
  XI.  General Ideas and Thought
  XII. Belief
  XIII.Truth and Falsehood
  XIV. Emotions and Will
  XV.  Characteristics of Mental Phenomena




THE ANALYSIS OF MIND




LECTURE I. RECENT CRITICISMS OF "CONSCIOUSNESS"

There are certain occurrences which we are in the habit of calling
"mental." Among these we may take as typical BELIEVING and DESIRING.
The exact definition of the word "mental" will, I hope, emerge as
the lectures proceed; for the present, I shall mean by it whatever
occurrences would commonly be called mental.

I wish in these lectures to analyse as fully as I can what it is that
really takes place when we, e.g. believe or desire. In this first
lecture I shall be concerned to refute a theory which is widely held,
and which I formerly held myself: the theory that the essence of
everything mental is a certain quite peculiar something called
"consciousness," conceived either as a relation to objects, or as a
pervading quality of psychical phenomena.

The reasons which I shall give against this theory will be mainly
derived from previous authors. There are two sorts of reasons, which
will divide my lecture into two parts:

(1) Direct reasons, derived from analysis and its difficulties;

(2) Indirect reasons, derived from observation of animals (comparative
psychology) and of the insane and hysterical (psycho-analysis).

Few things are more firmly established in popular philosophy than the
distinction between mind and matter. Those who are not professional
metaphysicians are willing to confess that they do not know what mind
actually is, or how matter is constituted; but they remain convinced
that there is an impassable gulf between the two, and that both belong
to what actually exists in the world. Philosophers, on the other hand,
have maintained often that matter is a mere fiction imagined by mind,
and sometimes that mind is a mere property of a certain kind of matter.
Those who maintain that mind is the reality and matter an evil dream are
called "idealists"--a word which has a different meaning in philosophy
from that which it bears in ordinary life. Those who argue that matter
is the reality and mind a mere property of protoplasm are called
"materialists." They have been rare among philosophers, but common,
at certain periods, among men of science. Idealists, materialists, and
ordinary mortals have been in agreement on one point: that they knew
sufficiently what they meant by the words "mind" and "matter" to be able
to conduct their debate intelligently. Yet it was just in this point, as
to which they were at one, that they seem to me to have been all alike
in error.

The stuff of which the world of our experience is composed is, in my
belief, neither mind nor matter, but something more primitive than
either. Both mind and matter seem to be composite, and the stuff of
which they are compounded lies in a sense between the two, in a sense
above them both, like a common ancestor. As regards matter, I have set
forth my reasons for this view on former occasions,* and I shall not now
repeat them. But the question of mind is more difficult, and it is this
question that I propose to discuss in these lectures. A great deal of
what I shall have to say is not original; indeed, much recent work, in
various fields, has tended to show the necessity of such theories as
those which I shall be advocating. Accordingly in this first lecture
I shall try to give a brief description of the systems of ideas within
which our investigation is to be carried on.

     * "Our Knowledge of the External World" (Allen & Unwin),
     Chapters III and IV. Also "Mysticism and Logic," Essays VII
     and VIII.

If there is one thing that may be said, in the popular estimation, to
characterize mind, that one thing is "consciousness." We say that we are
"conscious" of what we see and hear, of what we remember, and of our own
thoughts and feelings. Most of us believe that tables and chairs are
not "conscious." We think that when we sit in a chair, we are aware
of sitting in it, but it is not aware of being sat in. It cannot for
a moment be doubted that we are right in believing that there is SOME
difference between us and the chair in this respect: so much may be
taken as fact, and as a datum for our inquiry. But as soon as we try to
say what exactly the difference is, we become involved in perplexities.
Is "consciousness" ultimate and simple, something to be merely accepted
and contemplated? Or is it something complex, perhaps consisting in our
way of behaving in the presence of objects, or, alternatively, in the
existence in us of things called "ideas," having a certain relation
to objects, though different from them, and only symbolically
representative of them? Such questions are not easy to answer; but until
they are answered we cannot profess to know what we mean by saying that
we are possessed of "consciousness."

Before considering modern theories, let us look first at consciousness
from the standpoint of conventional psychology, since this embodies
views which naturally occur when we begin to reflect upon the subject.
For this purpose, let us as a preliminary consider different ways of
being conscious.

First, there is the way of PERCEPTION. We "perceive" tables and chairs,
horses and dogs, our friends, traffic passing in the street--in short,
anything which we recognize through the senses. I leave on one side for
the present the question whether pure sensation is to be regarded as a
form of consciousness: what I am speaking of now is perception, where,
according to conventional psychology, we go beyond the sensation to the
"thing" which it represents. When you hear a donkey bray, you not only
hear a noise, but realize that it comes from a donkey. When you see a
table, you not only see a coloured surface, but realize that it is hard.
The addition of these elements that go beyond crude sensation is said to
constitute perception. We shall have more to say about this at a later
stage. For the moment, I am merely concerned to note that perception
of objects is one of the most obvious examples of what is called
"consciousness." We are "conscious" of anything that we perceive.

We may take next the way of MEMORY. If I set to work to recall what
I did this morning, that is a form of consciousness different from
perception, since it is concerned with the past. There are various
problems as to how we can be conscious now of what no longer exists.
These will be dealt with incidentally when we come to the analysis of
memory.

From memory it is an easy step to what are called "ideas"--not in the
Platonic sense, but in that of Locke, Berkeley and Hume, in which they
are opposed to "impressions." You may be conscious of a friend either
by seeing him or by "thinking" of him; and by "thought" you can be
conscious of objects which cannot be seen, such as the human race,
or physiology. "Thought" in the narrower sense is that form of
consciousness which consists in "ideas" as opposed to impressions or
mere memories.

We may end our preliminary catalogue with BELIEF, by which I mean that
way of being conscious which may be either true or false. We say that a
man is "conscious of looking a fool," by which we mean that he believes
he looks a fool, and is not mistaken in this belief. This is a different
form of consciousness from any of the earlier ones. It is the form which
gives "knowledge" in the strict sense, and also error. It is, at least
apparently, more complex than our previous forms of consciousness;
though we shall find that they are not so separable from it as they
might appear to be.

Besides ways of being conscious there are other things that would
ordinarily be called "mental," such as desire and pleasure and pain.
These raise problems of their own, which we shall reach in Lecture III.
But the hardest problems are those that arise concerning ways of being
"conscious." These ways, taken together, are called the "cognitive"
elements in mind, and it is these that will occupy us most during the
following lectures.

There is one element which SEEMS obviously in common among the different
ways of being conscious, and that is, that they are all directed to
OBJECTS. We are conscious "of" something. The consciousness, it seems,
is one thing, and that of which we are conscious is another thing.
Unless we are to acquiesce in the view that we can never be conscious
of anything outside our own minds, we must say that the object of
consciousness need not be mental, though the consciousness must be. (I
am speaking within the circle of conventional doctrines, not expressing
my own beliefs.) This direction towards an object is commonly regarded
as typical of every form of cognition, and sometimes of mental life
altogether. We may distinguish two different tendencies in traditional
psychology. There are those who take mental phenomena naively, just as
they would physical phenomena. This school of psychologists tends not to
emphasize the object. On the other hand, there are those whose primary
interest is in the apparent fact that we have KNOWLEDGE, that there is a
world surrounding us of which we are aware. These men are interested in
the mind because of its relation to the world, because knowledge, if
it is a fact, is a very mysterious one. Their interest in psychology
is naturally centred in the relation of consciousness to its object, a
problem which, properly, belongs rather to theory of knowledge. We may
take as one of the best and most typical representatives of this school
the Austrian psychologist Brentano, whose "Psychology from the Empirical
Standpoint,"* though published in 1874, is still influential and was the
starting-point of a great deal of interesting work. He says (p. 115):

     * "Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte," vol. i, 1874.
     (The second volume was never published.)

"Every psychical phenomenon is characterized by what the scholastics of
the Middle Ages called the intentional (also the mental) inexistence of
an object, and what we, although with not quite unambiguous expressions,
would call relation to a content, direction towards an object (which is
not here to be understood as a reality), or immanent objectivity. Each
contains something in itself as an object, though not each in the same
way. In presentation something is presented, in judgment something is
acknowledged or rejected, in love something is loved, in hatred hated,
in desire desired, and so on.

"This intentional inexistence is exclusively peculiar to psychical
phenomena. No physical phenomenon shows anything similar. And so we
can define psychical phenomena by saying that they are phenomena which
intentionally contain an object in themselves."

The view here expressed, that relation to an object is an ultimate
irreducible characteristic of mental phenomena, is one which I shall be
concerned to combat. Like Brentano, I am interested in psychology, not
so much for its own sake, as for the light that it may throw on the
problem of knowledge. Until very lately I believed, as he did, that
mental phenomena have essential reference to objects, except possibly in
the case of pleasure and pain. Now I no longer believe this, even in
the case of knowledge. I shall try to make my reasons for this rejection
clear as we proceed. It must be evident at first glance that the
analysis of knowledge is rendered more difficult by the rejection; but
the apparent simplicity of Brentano's view of knowledge will be found,
if I am not mistaken, incapable of maintaining itself either against
an analytic scrutiny or against a host of facts in psycho-analysis and
animal psychology. I do not wish to minimize the problems. I will
merely observe, in mitigation of our prospective labours, that thinking,
however it is to be analysed, is in itself a delightful occupation,
and that there is no enemy to thinking so deadly as a false simplicity.
Travelling, whether in the mental or the physical world, is a joy, and
it is good to know that, in the mental world at least, there are vast
countries still very imperfectly explored.

The view expressed by Brentano has been held very generally, and
developed by many writers. Among these we may take as an example his
Austrian successor Meinong.* According to him there are three elements
involved in the thought of an object. These three he calls the act, the
content and the object. The act is the same in any two cases of the same
kind of consciousness; for instance, if I think of Smith or think
of Brown, the act of thinking, in itself, is exactly similar on both
occasions. But the content of my thought, the particular event that
is happening in my mind, is different when I think of Smith and when I
think of Brown. The content, Meinong argues, must not be confounded with
the object, since the content must exist in my mind at the moment when
I have the thought, whereas the object need not do so. The object may
be something past or future; it may be physical, not mental; it may
be something abstract, like equality for example; it may be something
imaginary, like a golden mountain; or it may even be something
self-contradictory, like a round square. But in all these cases, so
he contends, the content exists when the thought exists, and is what
distinguishes it, as an occurrence, from other thoughts.

     * See, e.g. his article: "Ueber Gegenstande hoherer Ordnung
     und deren Verhaltniss zur inneren Wahrnehmung," "Zeitschrift
     fur Psychologie and Physiologie der Sinnesorgane," vol. xxi,
     pp. 182-272 (1899), especially pp. 185-8.

To make this theory concrete, let us suppose that you are thinking of
St. Paul's. Then, according to Meinong, we have to distinguish three
elements which are necessarily combined in constituting the one thought.
First, there is the act of thinking, which would be just the same
whatever you were thinking about. Then there is what makes the character
of the thought as contrasted with other thoughts; this is the content.
And finally there is St. Paul's, which is the object of your thought.
There must be a difference between the content of a thought and what it
is about, since the thought is here and now, whereas what it is about
may not be; hence it is clear that the thought is not identical with St.
Paul's. This seems to show that we must distinguish between content
and object. But if Meinong is right, there can be no thought without an
object: the connection of the two is essential. The object might exist
without the thought, but not the thought without the object: the three
elements of act, content and object are all required to constitute the
one single occurrence called "thinking of St. Paul's."

The above analysis of a thought, though I believe it to be mistaken, is
very useful as affording a schema in terms of which other theories can
be stated. In the remainder of the present lecture I shall state in
outline the view which I advocate, and show how various other views
out of which mine has grown result from modifications of the threefold
analysis into act, content and object.

The first criticism I have to make is that the ACT seems unnecessary and
fictitious. The occurrence of the content of a thought constitutes
the occurrence of the thought. Empirically, I cannot discover anything
corresponding to the supposed act; and theoretically I cannot see that
it is indispensable. We say: "_I_ think so-and-so," and this word "I"
suggests that thinking is the act of a person. Meinong's "act" is the
ghost of the subject, or what once was the full-blooded soul. It is
supposed that thoughts cannot just come and go, but need a person to
think them. Now, of course it is true that thoughts can be collected
into bundles, so that one bundle is my thoughts, another is your
thoughts, and a third is the thoughts of Mr. Jones. But I think
the person is not an ingredient in the single thought: he is rather
constituted by relations of the thoughts to each other and to the body.
This is a large question, which need not, in its entirety, concern us
at present. All that I am concerned with for the moment is that the
grammatical forms "I think," "you think," and "Mr. Jones thinks," are
misleading if regarded as indicating an analysis of a single thought.
It would be better to say "it thinks in me," like "it rains here"; or
better still, "there is a thought in me." This is simply on the
ground that what Meinong calls the act in thinking is not empirically
discoverable, or logically deducible from what we can observe.

The next point of criticism concerns the relation of content and object.
The reference of thoughts to objects is not, I believe, the simple
direct essential thing that Brentano and Meinong represent it as being.
It seems to me to be derivative, and to consist largely in BELIEFS:
beliefs that what constitutes the thought is connected with various
other elements which together make up the object. You have, say, an
image of St. Paul's, or merely the word "St. Paul's" in your head. You
believe, however vaguely and dimly, that this is connected with what
you would see if you went to St. Paul's, or what you would feel if you
touched its walls; it is further connected with what other people see
and feel, with services and the Dean and Chapter and Sir Christopher
Wren. These things are not mere thoughts of yours, but your thought
stands in a relation to them of which you are more or less aware. The
awareness of this relation is a further thought, and constitutes
your feeling that the original thought had an "object." But in pure
imagination you can get very similar thoughts without these accompanying
beliefs; and in this case your thoughts do not have objects or seem to
have them. Thus in such instances you have content without object. On
the other hand, in seeing or hearing it would be less misleading to
say that you have object without content, since what you see or hear is
actually part of the physical world, though not matter in the sense of
physics. Thus the whole question of the relation of mental occurrences
to objects grows very complicated, and cannot be settled by regarding
reference to objects as of the essence of thoughts. All the above
remarks are merely preliminary, and will be expanded later.

Speaking in popular and unphilosophical terms, we may say that the
content of a thought is supposed to be something in your head when you
think the thought, while the object is usually something in the outer
world. It is held that knowledge of the outer world is constituted by
the relation to the object, while the fact that knowledge is different
from what it knows is due to the fact that knowledge comes by way of
contents. We can begin to state the difference between realism and
idealism in terms of this opposition of contents and objects. Speaking
quite roughly and approximately, we may say that idealism tends to
suppress the object, while realism tends to suppress the content.
Idealism, accordingly, says that nothing can be known except thoughts,
and all the reality that we know is mental; while realism maintains that
we know objects directly, in sensation certainly, and perhaps also in
memory and thought. Idealism does not say that nothing can be known
beyond the present thought, but it maintains that the context of vague
belief, which we spoke of in connection with the thought of St. Paul's,
only takes you to other thoughts, never to anything radically different
from thoughts. The difficulty of this view is in regard to sensation,
where it seems as if we came into direct contact with the outer world.
But the Berkeleian way of meeting this difficulty is so familiar that I
need not enlarge upon it now. I shall return to it in a later lecture,
and will only observe, for the present, that there seem to me no valid
grounds for regarding what we see and hear as not part of the physical
world.

Realists, on the other hand, as a rule, suppress the content, and
maintain that a thought consists either of act and object alone, or of
object alone. I have been in the past a realist, and I remain a realist
as regards sensation, but not as regards memory or thought. I will try
to explain what seem to me to be the reasons for and against various
kinds of realism.

Modern idealism professes to be by no means confined to the present
thought or the present thinker in regard to its knowledge; indeed, it
contends that the world is so organic, so dove-tailed, that from any
one portion the whole can be inferred, as the complete skeleton of an
extinct animal can be inferred from one bone. But the logic by which
this supposed organic nature of the world is nominally demonstrated
appears to realists, as it does to me, to be faulty. They argue that,
if we cannot know the physical world directly, we cannot really know
any thing outside our own minds: the rest of the world may be merely our
dream. This is a dreary view, and they there fore seek ways of escaping
from it. Accordingly they maintain that in knowledge we are in direct
contact with objects, which may be, and usually are, outside our own
minds. No doubt they are prompted to this view, in the first place, by
bias, namely, by the desire to think that they can know of the existence
of a world outside themselves. But we have to consider, not what led
them to desire the view, but whether their arguments for it are valid.

There are two different kinds of realism, according as we make a thought
consist of act and object, or of object alone. Their difficulties are
different, but neither seems tenable all through. Take, for the sake of
definiteness, the remembering of a past event. The remembering occurs
now, and is therefore necessarily not identical with the past event.
So long as we retain the act, this need cause no difficulty. The act
of remembering occurs now, and has on this view a certain essential
relation to the past event which it remembers. There is no LOGICAL
objection to this theory, but there is the objection, which we spoke
of earlier, that the act seems mythical, and is not to be found by
observation. If, on the other hand, we try to constitute memory without
the act, we are driven to a content, since we must have something that
happens NOW, as opposed to the event which happened in the past. Thus,
when we reject the act, which I think we must, we are driven to a theory
of memory which is more akin to idealism. These arguments, however, do
not apply to sensation. It is especially sensation, I think, which is
considered by those realists who retain only the object.* Their views,
which are chiefly held in America, are in large measure derived from
William James, and before going further it will be well to consider
the revolutionary doctrine which he advocated. I believe this doctrine
contains important new truth, and what I shall have to say will be in a
considerable measure inspired by it.

     * This is explicitly the case with Mach's "Analysis of
     Sensations," a book of fundamental importance in the present
     connection. (Translation of fifth German edition, Open Court
     Co., 1914. First German edition, 1886.)


William James's view was first set forth in an essay called "Does
'consciousness' exist?"* In this essay he explains how what used to be
the soul has gradually been refined down to the "transcendental ego,"
which, he says, "attenuates itself to a thoroughly ghostly condition,
being only a name for the fact that the 'content' of experience IS
KNOWN. It loses personal form and activity--these passing over to the
content--and becomes a bare Bewusstheit or Bewusstsein uberhaupt, of
which in its own right absolutely nothing can be said. I believe (he
continues) that 'consciousness,' when once it has evaporated to this
estate of pure diaphaneity, is on the point of disappearing altogether.
It is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a place among first
principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo,
the faint rumour left behind by the disappearing 'soul' upon the air of
philosophy"(p. 2).

     * "Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific
     Methods," vol. i, 1904. Reprinted in "Essays in Radical
     Empiricism" (Longmans, Green & Co., 1912), pp. 1-38, to
     which references in what follows refer.


He explains that this is no sudden change in his opinions. "For twenty
years past," he says, "I have mistrusted 'consciousness' as an entity;
for seven or eight years past I have suggested its non-existence to my
students, and tried to give them its pragmatic equivalent in realities
of experience. It seems to me that the hour is ripe for it to be openly
and universally discarded"(p. 3).

His next concern is to explain away the air of paradox, for James
was never wilfully paradoxical. "Undeniably," he says, "'thoughts' do
exist." "I mean only to deny that the word stands for an entity, but to
insist most emphatically that it does stand for a function. There is, I
mean, no aboriginal stuff or quality of being, contrasted with that of
which material objects are made, out of which our thoughts of them are
made; but there is a function in experience which thoughts perform,
and for the performance of which this quality of being is invoked. That
function is KNOWING"(pp. 3-4).

James's view is that the raw material out of which the world is built
up is not of two sorts, one matter and the other mind, but that it is
arranged in different patterns by its inter-relations, and that some
arrangements may be called mental, while others may be called physical.

"My thesis is," he says, "that if we start with the supposition that
there is only one primal stuff or material in the world, a stuff
of which everything is composed, and if we call that stuff 'pure
experience,' then knowing can easily be explained as a particular sort
of relation towards one another into which portions of pure experience
may enter. The relation itself is a part of pure experience; one of its
'terms' becomes the subject or bearer of the knowledge, the knower, the
other becomes the object known"(p. 4).

After mentioning the duality of subject and object, which is supposed
to constitute consciousness, he proceeds in italics: "EXPERIENCE, I
BELIEVE, HAS NO SUCH INNER DUPLICITY; AND THE SEPARATION OF IT INTO
CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONTENT COMES, NOT BY WAY OF SUBTRACTION, BUT BY WAY
OF ADDITION"(p. 9).

He illustrates his meaning by the analogy of paint as it appears in a
paint-shop and as it appears in a picture: in the one case it is just
"saleable matter," while in the other it "performs a spiritual function.
Just so, I maintain (he continues), does a given undivided portion
of experience, taken in one context of associates, play the part of a
knower, of a state of mind, of 'consciousness'; while in a different
context the same undivided bit of experience plays the part of a thing
known, of an objective 'content.' In a word, in one group it figures as
a thought, in another group as a thing"(pp. 9-10).

He does not believe in the supposed immediate certainty of thought. "Let
the case be what it may in others," he says, "I am as confident as I am
of anything that, in myself, the stream of thinking (which I recognize
emphatically as a phenomenon) is only a careless name for what, when
scrutinized, reveals itself to consist chiefly of the stream of my
breathing. The 'I think' which Kant said must be able to accompany all
my objects, is the 'I breathe' which actually does accompany them"(pp.
36-37).

The same view of "consciousness" is set forth in the succeeding essay,
"A World of Pure Experience" (ib., pp. 39-91). The use of the phrase
"pure experience" in both essays points to a lingering influence of
idealism. "Experience," like "consciousness," must be a product, not
part of the primary stuff of the world. It must be possible, if James is
right in his main contentions, that roughly the same stuff, differently
arranged, would not give rise to anything that could be called
"experience." This word has been dropped by the American realists, among
whom we may mention specially Professor R. B. Perry of Harvard and Mr.
Edwin B. Holt. The interests of this school are in general philosophy
and the philosophy of the sciences, rather than in psychology; they have
derived a strong impulsion from James, but have more interest than he
had in logic and mathematics and the abstract part of philosophy. They
speak of "neutral" entities as the stuff out of which both mind and
matter are constructed. Thus Holt says: "If the terms and propositions
of logic must be substantialized, they are all strictly of one
substance, for which perhaps the least dangerous name is neutral-stuff.
The relation of neutral-stuff to matter and mind we shall have presently
to consider at considerable length." *

     * "The Concept of Consciousness" (Geo. Allen & Co., 1914),
     p. 52.

My own belief--for which the reasons will appear in subsequent
lectures--is that James is right in rejecting consciousness as an
entity, and that the American realists are partly right, though not
wholly, in considering that both mind and matter are composed of a
neutral-stuff which, in isolation, is neither mental nor material. I
should admit this view as regards sensations: what is heard or seen
belongs equally to psychology and to physics. But I should say that
images belong only to the mental world, while those occurrences (if any)
which do not form part of any "experience" belong only to the physical
world. There are, it seems to me, prima facie different kinds of causal
laws, one belonging to physics and the other to psychology. The law
of gravitation, for example, is a physical law, while the law of
association is a psychological law. Sensations are subject to both kinds
of laws, and are therefore truly "neutral" in Holt's sense. But entities
subject only to physical laws, or only to psychological laws, are not
neutral, and may be called respectively purely material and purely
mental. Even those, however, which are purely mental will not have that
intrinsic reference to objects which Brentano assigns to them and which
constitutes the essence of "consciousness" as ordinarily understood. But
it is now time to pass on to other modern tendencies, also hostile to
"consciousness."

There is a psychological school called "Behaviourists," of whom the
protagonist is Professor John B. Watson,* formerly of the Johns Hopkins
University. To them also, on the whole, belongs Professor John Dewey,
who, with James and Dr. Schiller, was one of the three founders of
pragmatism. The view of the "behaviourists" is that nothing can be known
except by external observation. They deny altogether that there is a
separate source of knowledge called "introspection," by which we can
know things about ourselves which we could never observe in others.
They do not by any means deny that all sorts of things MAY go on in
our minds: they only say that such things, if they occur, are not
susceptible of scientific observation, and do not therefore concern
psychology as a science. Psychology as a science, they say, is only
concerned with BEHAVIOUR, i.e. with what we DO; this alone, they
contend, can be accurately observed. Whether we think meanwhile, they
tell us, cannot be known; in their observation of the behaviour of human
beings, they have not so far found any evidence of thought. True, we
talk a great deal, and imagine that in so doing we are showing that we
can think; but behaviourists say that the talk they have to listen to
can be explained without supposing that people think. Where you might
expect a chapter on "thought processes" you come instead upon a chapter
on "The Language Habit." It is humiliating to find how terribly adequate
this hypothesis turns out to be.

     * See especially his "Behavior: an Introduction to
     Comparative Psychology," New York, 1914.

Behaviourism has not, however, sprung from observing the folly of men.
It is the wisdom of animals that has suggested the view. It has always
been a common topic of popular discussion whether animals "think." On
this topic people are prepared to take sides without having the vaguest
idea what they mean by "thinking." Those who desired to investigate such
questions were led to observe the behaviour of animals, in the hope that
their behaviour would throw some light on their mental faculties.
At first sight, it might seem that this is so. People say that a
dog "knows" its name because it comes when it is called, and that it
"remembers" its master, because it looks sad in his absence, but wags
its tail and barks when he returns. That the dog behaves in this way is
matter of observation, but that it "knows" or "remembers" anything is an
inference, and in fact a very doubtful one. The more such inferences are
examined, the more precarious they are seen to be. Hence the study of
animal behaviour has been gradually led to abandon all attempt at mental
interpretation. And it can hardly be doubted that, in many cases of
complicated behaviour very well adapted to its ends, there can be no
prevision of those ends. The first time a bird builds a nest, we can
hardly suppose it knows that there will be eggs to be laid in it, or
that it will sit on the eggs, or that they will hatch into young birds.
It does what it does at each stage because instinct gives it an impulse
to do just that, not because it foresees and desires the result of its
actions.*

     * An interesting discussion of the question whether
     instinctive actions, when first performed, involve any
     prevision, however vague, will be found in Lloyd Morgan's
     "Instinct and Experience" (Methuen, 1912), chap. ii.

Careful observers of animals, being anxious to avoid precarious
inferences, have gradually discovered more and more how to give
an account of the actions of animals without assuming what we call
"consciousness." It has seemed to the behaviourists that similar methods
can be applied to human behaviour, without assuming anything not open
to external observation. Let us give a crude illustration, too crude for
the authors in question, but capable of affording a rough insight into
their meaning. Suppose two children in a school, both of whom are asked
"What is six times nine?" One says fifty-four, the other says fifty-six.
The one, we say, "knows" what six times nine is, the other does not. But
all that we can observe is a certain language-habit. The one child has
acquired the habit of saying "six times nine is fifty-four"; the other
has not. There is no more need of "thought" in this than there is when
a horse turns into his accustomed stable; there are merely more numerous
and complicated habits. There is obviously an observable fact called
"knowing" such-and-such a thing; examinations are experiments for
discovering such facts. But all that is observed or discovered is a
certain set of habits in the use of words. The thoughts (if any) in the
mind of the examinee are of no interest to the examiner; nor has the
examiner any reason to suppose even the most successful examinee capable
of even the smallest amount of thought.

Thus what is called "knowing," in the sense in which we can ascertain
what other people "know," is a phenomenon exemplified in their physical
behaviour, including spoken and written words. There is no reason--so
Watson argues--to suppose that their knowledge IS anything beyond the
habits shown in this behaviour: the inference that other people
have something nonphysical called "mind" or "thought" is therefore
unwarranted.

So far, there is nothing particularly repugnant to our prejudices in the
conclusions of the behaviourists. We are all willing to admit that
other people are thoughtless. But when it comes to ourselves, we feel
convinced that we can actually perceive our own thinking. "Cogito, ergo
sum" would be regarded by most people as having a true premiss. This,
however, the behaviourist denies. He maintains that our knowledge of
ourselves is no different in kind from our knowledge of other people.
We may see MORE, because our own body is easier to observe than that of
other people; but we do not see anything radically unlike what we see
of others. Introspection, as a separate source of knowledge, is entirely
denied by psychologists of this school. I shall discuss this question at
length in a later lecture; for the present I will only observe that
it is by no means simple, and that, though I believe the behaviourists
somewhat overstate their case, yet there is an important element of
truth in their contention, since the things which we can discover by
introspection do not seem to differ in any very fundamental way from the
things which we discover by external observation.

So far, we have been principally concerned with knowing. But it might
well be maintained that desiring is what is really most characteristic
of mind. Human beings are constantly engaged in achieving some end
they feel pleasure in success and pain in failure. In a purely material
world, it may be said, there would be no opposition of pleasant and
unpleasant, good and bad, what is desired and what is feared. A man's
acts are governed by purposes. He decides, let us suppose, to go to a
certain place, whereupon he proceeds to the station, takes his ticket
and enters the train. If the usual route is blocked by an accident,
he goes by some other route. All that he does is determined--or so it
seems--by the end he has in view, by what lies in front of him, rather
than by what lies behind. With dead matter, this is not the case.
A stone at the top of a hill may start rolling, but it shows no
pertinacity in trying to get to the bottom. Any ledge or obstacle will
stop it, and it will exhibit no signs of discontent if this happens. It
is not attracted by the pleasantness of the valley, as a sheep or cow
might be, but propelled by the steepness of the hill at the place
where it is. In all this we have characteristic differences between the
behaviour of animals and the behaviour of matter as studied by physics.

Desire, like knowledge, is, of course, in one sense an observable
phenomenon. An elephant will eat a bun, but not a mutton chop; a duck
will go into the water, but a hen will not. But when we think of our
own desires, most people believe that we can know them by an immediate
self-knowledge which does not depend upon observation of our actions.
Yet if this were the case, it would be odd that people are so often
mistaken as to what they desire. It is matter of common observation that
"so-and-so does not know his own motives," or that "A is envious of B
and malicious about him, but quite unconscious of being so." Such people
are called self-deceivers, and are supposed to have had to go through
some more or less elaborate process of concealing from themselves what
would otherwise have been obvious. I believe that this is an entire
mistake. I believe that the discovery of our own motives can only be
made by the same process by which we discover other people's, namely,
the process of observing our actions and inferring the desire which
could prompt them. A desire is "conscious" when we have told ourselves
that we have it. A hungry man may say to himself: "Oh, I do want my
lunch." Then his desire is "conscious." But it only differs from an
"unconscious" desire by the presence of appropriate words, which is by
no means a fundamental difference.

The belief that a motive is normally conscious makes it easier to be
mistaken as to our own motives than as to other people's. When some
desire that we should be ashamed of is attributed to us, we notice that
we have never had it consciously, in the sense of saying to ourselves,
"I wish that would happen." We therefore look for some other
interpretation of our actions, and regard our friends as very unjust
when they refuse to be convinced by our repudiation of what we hold to
be a calumny. Moral considerations greatly increase the difficulty of
clear thinking in this matter. It is commonly argued that people are not
to blame for unconscious motives, but only for conscious ones. In order,
therefore, to be wholly virtuous it is only necessary to repeat virtuous
formulas. We say: "I desire to be kind to my friends, honourable in
business, philanthropic towards the poor, public-spirited in politics."
So long as we refuse to allow ourselves, even in the watches of the
night, to avow any contrary desires, we may be bullies at home, shady in
the City, skinflints in paying wages and profiteers in dealing with the
public; yet, if only conscious motives are to count in moral valuation,
we shall remain model characters. This is an agreeable doctrine, and
it is not surprising that men are un willing to abandon it. But moral
considerations are the worst enemies of the scientific spirit and we
must dismiss them from our minds if we wish to arrive at truth.

I believe--as I shall try to prove in a later lecture--that desire,
like force in mechanics, is of the nature of a convenient fiction
for describing shortly certain laws of behaviour. A hungry animal is
restless until it finds food; then it becomes quiescent. The thing which
will bring a restless condition to an end is said to be what is desired.
But only experience can show what will have this sedative effect, and it
is easy to make mistakes. We feel dissatisfaction, and think that
such and-such a thing would remove it; but in thinking this, we are
theorizing, not observing a patent fact. Our theorizing is often
mistaken, and when it is mistaken there is a difference between what we
think we desire and what in fact will bring satisfaction. This is such
a common phenomenon that any theory of desire which fails to account for
it must be wrong.

What have been called "unconscious" desires have been brought very much
to the fore in recent years by psycho-analysis. Psycho-analysis, as
every one knows, is primarily a method of understanding hysteria and
certain forms of insanity*; but it has been found that there is much
in the lives of ordinary men and women which bears a humiliating
resemblance to the delusions of the insane. The connection of dreams,
irrational beliefs and foolish actions with unconscious wishes has been
brought to light, though with some exaggeration, by Freud and Jung and
their followers. As regards the nature of these unconscious wishes,
it seems to me--though as a layman I speak with diffidence--that many
psycho-analysts are unduly narrow; no doubt the wishes they emphasize
exist, but others, e.g. for honour and power, are equally operative and
equally liable to concealment. This, however, does not affect the
value of their general theories from the point of view of theoretic
psychology, and it is from this point of view that their results are
important for the analysis of mind.

     * There is a wide field of "unconscious" phenomena which
     does not depend upon psycho-analytic theories. Such
     occurrences as automatic writing lead Dr. Morton Prince to
     say: "As I view this question of the subconscious, far too
     much weight is given to the point of awareness or not
     awareness of our conscious processes. As a matter of fact,
     we find entirely identical phenomena, that is, identical in
     every respect but one-that of awareness in which sometimes
     we are aware of these conscious phenomena and sometimes
     not"(p. 87 of "Subconscious Phenomena," by various authors,
     Rebman). Dr. Morton Price conceives that there may be
     "consciousness" without "awareness." But this is a difficult
     view, and one which makes some definition of "consciousness"
     imperative. For nay part, I cannot see how to separate
     consciousness from awareness.

What, I think, is clearly established, is that a man's actions and
beliefs may be wholly dominated by a desire of which he is quite
unconscious, and which he indignantly repudiates when it is suggested
to him. Such a desire is generally, in morbid cases, of a sort which
the patient would consider wicked; if he had to admit that he had the
desire, he would loathe himself. Yet it is so strong that it must force
an outlet for itself; hence it becomes necessary to entertain whole
systems of false beliefs in order to hide the nature of what is desired.
The resulting delusions in very many cases disappear if the hysteric or
lunatic can be made to face the facts about himself. The consequence
of this is that the treatment of many forms of insanity has grown more
psychological and less physiological than it used to be. Instead of
looking for a physical defect in the brain, those who treat delusions
look for the repressed desire which has found this contorted mode
of expression. For those who do not wish to plunge into the somewhat
repulsive and often rather wild theories of psychoanalytic pioneers, it
will be worth while to read a little book by Dr. Bernard Hart on "The
Psychology of Insanity."* On this question of the mental as opposed to
the physiological study of the causes of insanity, Dr. Hart says:

     * Cambridge, 1912; 2nd edition, 1914. The following
     references are to the second edition.

"The psychological conception [of insanity] is based on the view that
mental processes can be directly studied without any reference to the
accompanying changes which are presumed to take place in the brain, and
that insanity may therefore be properly attacked from the standpoint of
psychology"(p. 9).

This illustrates a point which I am anxious to make clear from the
outset. Any attempt to classify modern views, such as I propose to
advocate, from the old standpoint of materialism and idealism, is only
misleading. In certain respects, the views which I shall be setting
forth approximate to materialism; in certain others, they approximate to
its opposite. On this question of the study of delusions, the practical
effect of the modern theories, as Dr. Hart points out, is emancipation
from the materialist method. On the other hand, as he also points
out (pp. 38-9), imbecility and dementia still have to be considered
physiologically, as caused by defects in the brain. There is no
inconsistency in this If, as we maintain, mind and matter are neither of
them the actual stuff of reality, but different convenient groupings of
an underlying material, then, clearly, the question whether, in regard
to a given phenomenon, we are to seek a physical or a mental cause, is
merely one to be decided by trial. Metaphysicians have argued endlessly
as to the interaction of mind and matter. The followers of Descartes
held that mind and matter are so different as to make any action of the
one on the other impossible. When I will to move my arm, they said,
it is not my will that operates on my arm, but God, who, by His
omnipotence, moves my arm whenever I want it moved. The modern doctrine
of psychophysical parallelism is not appreciably different from this
theory of the Cartesian school. Psycho-physical parallelism is the
theory that mental and physical events each have causes in their own
sphere, but run on side by side owing to the fact that every state of
the brain coexists with a definite state of the mind, and vice versa.
This view of the reciprocal causal independence of mind and matter has
no basis except in metaphysical theory.* For us, there is no necessity
to make any such assumption, which is very difficult to harmonize with
obvious facts. I receive a letter inviting me to dinner: the letter is
a physical fact, but my apprehension of its meaning is mental. Here we
have an effect of matter on mind. In consequence of my apprehension of
the meaning of the letter, I go to the right place at the right time;
here we have an effect of mind on matter. I shall try to persuade you,
in the course of these lectures, that matter is not so material and mind
not so mental as is generally supposed. When we are speaking of matter,
it will seem as if we were inclining to idealism; when we are speaking
of mind, it will seem as if we were inclining to materialism. Neither
is the truth. Our world is to be constructed out of what the American
realists call "neutral" entities, which have neither the hardness and
indestructibility of matter, nor the reference to objects which is
supposed to characterize mind.

     * It would seem, however, that Dr. Hart accepts this theory
     as 8 methodological precept. See his contribution to
     "Subconscious Phenomena" (quoted above), especially pp. 121-2.

There is, it is true, one objection which might be felt, not indeed to
the action of matter on mind, but to the action of mind on matter. The
laws of physics, it may be urged, are apparently adequate to explain
everything that happens to matter, even when it is matter in a man's
brain. This, however, is only a hypothesis, not an established theory.
There is no cogent empirical reason for supposing that the laws
determining the motions of living bodies are exactly the same as those
that apply to dead matter. Sometimes, of course, they are clearly the
same. When a man falls from a precipice or slips on a piece of orange
peel, his body behaves as if it were devoid of life. These are the
occasions that make Bergson laugh. But when a man's bodily movements
are what we call "voluntary," they are, at any rate prima facie, very
different in their laws from the movements of what is devoid of life.
I do not wish to say dogmatically that the difference is irreducible;
I think it highly probable that it is not. I say only that the study of
the behaviour of living bodies, in the present state of our knowledge,
is distinct from physics. The study of gases was originally quite
distinct from that of rigid bodies, and would never have advanced to its
present state if it had not been independently pursued. Nowadays both
the gas and the rigid body are manufactured out of a more primitive and
universal kind of matter. In like manner, as a question of methodology,
the laws of living bodies are to be studied, in the first place, without
any undue haste to subordinate them to the laws of physics. Boyle's law
and the rest had to be discovered before the kinetic theory of gases
became possible. But in psychology we are hardly yet at the stage
of Boyle's law. Meanwhile we need not be held up by the bogey of
the universal rigid exactness of physics. This is, as yet, a mere
hypothesis, to be tested empirically without any preconceptions. It may
be true, or it may not. So far, that is all we can say.

Returning from this digression to our main topic, namely, the criticism
of "consciousness," we observe that Freud and his followers, though they
have demonstrated beyond dispute the immense importance of "unconscious"
desires in determining our actions and beliefs, have not attempted the
task of telling us what an "unconscious" desire actually is, and have
thus invested their doctrine with an air of mystery and mythology which
forms a large part of its popular attractiveness. They speak always as
though it were more normal for a desire to be conscious, and as though
a positive cause had to be assigned for its being unconscious. Thus
"the unconscious" becomes a sort of underground prisoner, living in a
dungeon, breaking in at long intervals upon our daylight respectability
with dark groans and maledictions and strange atavistic lusts. The
ordinary reader, almost inevitably, thinks of this underground person as
another consciousness, prevented by what Freud calls the "censor" from
making his voice heard in company, except on rare and dreadful occasions
when he shouts so loud that every one hears him and there is a scandal.
Most of us like the idea that we could be desperately wicked if only we
let ourselves go. For this reason, the Freudian "unconscious" has been a
consolation to many quiet and well-behaved persons.

I do not think the truth is quite so picturesque as this. I believe an
"unconscious" desire is merely a causal law of our behaviour,* namely,
that we remain restlessly active until a certain state of affairs is
realized, when we achieve temporary equilibrium If we know beforehand
what this state of affairs is, our desire is conscious; if not,
unconscious. The unconscious desire is not something actually existing,
but merely a tendency to a certain behaviour; it has exactly the same
status as a force in dynamics. The unconscious desire is in no way
mysterious; it is the natural primitive form of desire, from which the
other has developed through our habit of observing and theorizing (often
wrongly). It is not necessary to suppose, as Freud seems to do,
that every unconscious wish was once conscious, and was then, in his
terminology, "repressed" because we disapproved of it. On the contrary,
we shall suppose that, although Freudian "repression" undoubtedly occurs
and is important, it is not the usual reason for unconsciousness of our
wishes. The usual reason is merely that wishes are all, to begin with,
unconscious, and only become known when they are actively noticed.
Usually, from laziness, people do not notice, but accept the theory
of human nature which they find current, and attribute to themselves
whatever wishes this theory would lead them to expect. We used to be
full of virtuous wishes, but since Freud our wishes have become, in
the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, "deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked." Both these views, in most of those who have held
them, are the product of theory rather than observation, for observation
requires effort, whereas repeating phrases does not.

     * Cf. Hart, "The Psychology of Insanity," p. 19.

The interpretation of unconscious wishes which I have been advocating
has been set forth briefly by Professor John B. Watson in an article
called "The Psychology of Wish Fulfilment," which appeared in "The
Scientific Monthly" in November, 1916. Two quotations will serve to show
his point of view:

"The Freudians (he says) have made more or less of a 'metaphysical
entity' out of the censor. They suppose that when wishes are repressed
they are repressed into the 'unconscious,' and that this mysterious
censor stands at the trapdoor lying between the conscious and the
unconscious. Many of us do not believe in a world of the unconscious
(a few of us even have grave doubts about the usefulness of the term
consciousness), hence we try to explain censorship along ordinary
biological lines. We believe that one group of habits can 'down' another
group of habits--or instincts. In this case our ordinary system of
habits--those which we call expressive of our 'real selves'--inhibit
or quench (keep inactive or partially inactive) those habits and
instinctive tendencies which belong largely in the past"(p. 483).

Again, after speaking of the frustration of some impulses which is
involved in acquiring the habits of a civilized adult, he continues:

"It is among these frustrated impulses that I would find the biological
basis of the unfulfilled wish. Such 'wishes' need never have been
'conscious,' and NEED NEVER HAVE BEEN SUPPRESSED INTO FREUD'S REALM
OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. It may be inferred from this that there is no
particular reason for applying the term 'wish' to such tendencies"(p.
485).

One of the merits of the general analysis of mind which we shall
be concerned with in the following lectures is that it removes the
atmosphere of mystery from the phenomena brought to light by the
psycho-analysts. Mystery is delightful, but unscientific, since it
depends upon ignorance. Man has developed out of the animals, and
there is no serious gap between him and the amoeba. Something closely
analogous to knowledge and desire, as regards its effects on behaviour,
exists among animals, even where what we call "consciousness" is hard
to believe in; something equally analogous exists in ourselves in cases
where no trace of "consciousness" can be found. It is therefore
natural to suppose that, what ever may be the correct definition of
"consciousness," "consciousness" is not the essence of life or mind. In
the following lectures, accordingly, this term will disappear until we
have dealt with words, when it will re-emerge as mainly a trivial and
unimportant outcome of linguistic habits.




LECTURE II. INSTINCT AND HABIT

In attempting to understand the elements out of which mental phenomena
are compounded, it is of the greatest importance to remember that from
the protozoa to man there is nowhere a very wide gap either in structure
or in behaviour. From this fact it is a highly probable inference that
there is also nowhere a very wide mental gap. It is, of course, POSSIBLE
that there may be, at certain stages in evolution, elements which are
entirely new from the standpoint of analysis, though in their nascent
form they have little influence on behaviour and no very marked
correlatives in structure. But the hypothesis of continuity in mental
development is clearly preferable if no psychological facts make it
impossible. We shall find, if I am not mistaken, that there are no facts
which refute the hypothesis of mental continuity, and that, on the other
hand, this hypothesis affords a useful test of suggested theories as to
the nature of mind.

The hypothesis of mental continuity throughout organic evolution may be
used in two different ways. On the one hand, it may be held that we
have more knowledge of our own minds than those of animals, and that we
should use this knowledge to infer the existence of something similar
to our own mental processes in animals and even in plants. On the other
hand, it may be held that animals and plants present simpler phenomena,
more easily analysed than those of human minds; on this ground it may be
urged that explanations which are adequate in the case of animals ought
not to be lightly rejected in the case of man. The practical effects of
these two views are diametrically opposite: the first leads us to level
up animal intelligence with what we believe ourselves to know about our
own intelligence, while the second leads us to attempt a levelling down
of our own intelligence to something not too remote from what we can
observe in animals. It is therefore important to consider the relative
justification of the two ways of applying the principle of continuity.

It is clear that the question turns upon another, namely, which can we
know best, the psychology of animals or that of human beings? If we
can know most about animals, we shall use this knowledge as a basis for
inference about human beings; if we can know most about human beings, we
shall adopt the opposite procedure. And the question whether we can know
most about the psychology of human beings or about that of animals turns
upon yet another, namely: Is introspection or external observation
the surer method in psychology? This is a question which I propose to
discuss at length in Lecture VI; I shall therefore content myself now
with a statement of the conclusions to be arrived at.

We know a great many things concerning ourselves which we cannot know
nearly so directly concerning animals or even other people. We know when
we have a toothache, what we are thinking of, what dreams we have when
we are asleep, and a host of other occurrences which we only know about
others when they tell us of them, or otherwise make them inferable
by their behaviour. Thus, so far as knowledge of detached facts is
concerned, the advantage is on the side of self-knowledge as against
external observation.

But when we come to the analysis and scientific understanding of the
facts, the advantages on the side of self-knowledge become far less
clear. We know, for example, that we have desires and beliefs, but we
do not know what constitutes a desire or a belief. The phenomena are so
familiar that it is difficult to realize how little we really know about
them. We see in animals, and to a lesser extent in plants, behaviour
more or less similar to that which, in us, is prompted by desires and
beliefs, and we find that, as we descend in the scale of evolution,
behaviour becomes simpler, more easily reducible to rule, more
scientifically analysable and predictable. And just because we are not
misled by familiarity we find it easier to be cautious in interpreting
behaviour when we are dealing with phenomena remote from those of our
own minds: Moreover, introspection, as psychoanalysis has demonstrated,
is extraordinarily fallible even in cases where we feel a high degree of
certainty. The net result seems to be that, though self-knowledge has
a definite and important contribution to make to psychology, it is
exceedingly misleading unless it is constantly checked and controlled
by the test of external observation, and by the theories which such
observation suggests when applied to animal behaviour. On the whole,
therefore, there is probably more to be learnt about human psychology
from animals than about animal psychology from human beings; but this
conclusion is one of degree, and must not be pressed beyond a point.

It is only bodily phenomena that can be directly observed in animals,
or even, strictly speaking, in other human beings. We can observe such
things as their movements, their physiological processes, and the sounds
they emit. Such things as desires and beliefs, which seem obvious
to introspection, are not visible directly to external observation.
Accordingly, if we begin our study of psychology by external
observation, we must not begin by assuming such things as desires and
beliefs, but only such things as external observation can reveal, which
will be characteristics of the movements and physiological processes of
animals. Some animals, for example, always run away from light and hide
themselves in dark places. If you pick up a mossy stone which is lightly
embedded in the earth, you will see a number of small animals scuttling
away from the unwonted daylight and seeking again the darkness of which
you have deprived them. Such animals are sensitive to light, in the
sense that their movements are affected by it; but it would be rash to
infer that they have sensations in any way analogous to our sensations
of sight. Such inferences, which go beyond the observable facts, are to
be avoided with the utmost care.

It is customary to divide human movements into three classes, voluntary,
reflex and mechanical. We may illustrate the distinction by a quotation
from William James ("Psychology," i, 12):

"If I hear the conductor calling 'all aboard' as I enter the depot, my
heart first stops, then palpitates, and my legs respond to the air-waves
falling on my tympanum by quickening their movements. If I stumble as I
run, the sensation of falling provokes a movement of the hands towards
the direction of the fall, the effect of which is to shield the body
from too sudden a shock. If a cinder enter my eye, its lids close
forcibly and a copious flow of tears tends to wash it out.

"These three responses to a sensational stimulus differ, however, in
many respects. The closure of the eye and the lachrymation are quite
involuntary, and so is the disturbance of the heart. Such involuntary
responses we know as 'reflex' acts. The motion of the arms to break the
shock of falling may also be called reflex, since it occurs too quickly
to be deliberately intended. Whether it be instinctive or whether it
result from the pedestrian education of childhood may be doubtful; it
is, at any rate, less automatic than the previous acts, for a man might
by conscious effort learn to perform it more skilfully, or even to
suppress it altogether. Actions of this kind, with which instinct and
volition enter upon equal terms, have been called 'semi-reflex.' The
act of running towards the train, on the other hand, has no instinctive
element about it. It is purely the result of education, and is preceded
by a consciousness of the purpose to be attained and a distinct mandate
of the will. It is a 'voluntary act.' Thus the animal's reflex and
voluntary performances shade into each other gradually, being connected
by acts which may often occur automatically, but may also be modified by
conscious intelligence.

"An outside observer, unable to perceive the accompanying consciousness,
might be wholly at a loss to discriminate between the automatic acts and
those which volition escorted. But if the criterion of mind's existence
be the choice of the proper means for the attainment of a supposed
end, all the acts alike seem to be inspired by intelligence, for
APPROPRIATENESS characterizes them all alike."

There is one movement, among those that James mentions at first, which
is not subsequently classified, namely, the stumbling. This is the
kind of movement which may be called "mechanical"; it is evidently of a
different kind from either reflex or voluntary movements, and more akin
to the movements of dead matter. We may define a movement of an animal's
body as "mechanical" when it proceeds as if only dead matter were
involved. For example, if you fall over a cliff, you move under the
influence of gravitation, and your centre of gravity describes just as
correct a parabola as if you were already dead. Mechanical movements
have not the characteristic of appropriateness, unless by accident, as
when a drunken man falls into a waterbutt and is sobered. But reflex
and voluntary movements are not ALWAYS appropriate, unless in some very
recondite sense. A moth flying into a lamp is not acting sensibly; no
more is a man who is in such a hurry to get his ticket that he cannot
remember the name of his destination. Appropriateness is a complicated
and merely approximate idea, and for the present we shall do well to
dismiss it from our thoughts.

As James states, there is no difference, from the point of view of
the outside observer, between voluntary and reflex movements. The
physiologist can discover that both depend upon the nervous system,
and he may find that the movements which we call voluntary depend upon
higher centres in the brain than those that are reflex. But he
cannot discover anything as to the presence or absence of "will" or
"consciousness," for these things can only be seen from within, if
at all. For the present, we wish to place ourselves resolutely in the
position of outside observers; we will therefore ignore the distinction
between voluntary and reflex movements. We will call the two together
"vital" movements. We may then distinguish "vital" from mechanical
movements by the fact that vital movements depend for their causation
upon the special properties of the nervous system, while mechanical
movements depend only upon the properties which animal bodies share with
matter in general.

There is need for some care if the distinction between mechanical and
vital movements is to be made precise. It is quite likely that, if we
knew more about animal bodies, we could deduce all their movements from
the laws of chemistry and physics. It is already fairly easy to see how
chemistry reduces to physics, i.e. how the differences between different
chemical elements can be accounted for by differences of physical
structure, the constituents of the structure being electrons which are
exactly alike in all kinds of matter. We only know in part how to reduce
physiology to chemistry, but we know enough to make it likely that the
reduction is possible. If we suppose it effected, what would become of
the difference between vital and mechanical movements?

Some analogies will make the difference clear. A shock to a mass of
dynamite produces quite different effects from an equal shock to a mass
of steel: in the one case there is a vast explosion, while in the other
case there is hardly any noticeable disturbance. Similarly, you may
sometimes find on a mountain-side a large rock poised so delicately that
a touch will set it crashing down into the valley, while the rocks all
round are so firm that only a considerable force can dislodge them What
is analogous in these two cases is the existence of a great store of
energy in unstable equilibrium ready to burst into violent motion by
the addition of a very slight disturbance. Similarly, it requires only
a very slight expenditure of energy to send a post-card with the words
"All is discovered; fly!" but the effect in generating kinetic energy
is said to be amazing. A human body, like a mass of dynamite, contains
a store of energy in unstable equilibrium, ready to be directed in this
direction or that by a disturbance which is physically very small,
such as a spoken word. In all such cases the reduction of behaviour to
physical laws can only be effected by entering into great minuteness; so
long as we confine ourselves to the observation of comparatively
large masses, the way in which the equilibrium will be upset cannot be
determined. Physicists distinguish between macroscopic and microscopic
equations: the former determine the visible movements of bodies of
ordinary size, the latter the minute occurrences in the smallest parts.
It is only the microscopic equations that are supposed to be the same
for all sorts of matter. The macroscopic equations result from a process
of averaging out, and may be different in different cases. So, in our
instance, the laws of macroscopic phenomena are different for mechanical
and vital movements, though the laws of microscopic phenomena may be the
same.

We may say, speaking somewhat roughly, that a stimulus applied to the
nervous system, like a spark to dynamite, is able to take advantage of
the stored energy in unstable equilibrium, and thus to produce movements
out of proportion to the proximate cause. Movements produced in this way
are vital movements, while mechanical movements are those in which the
stored energy of a living body is not involved. Similarly dynamite may
be exploded, thereby displaying its characteristic properties, or may
(with due precautions) be carted about like any other mineral. The
explosion is analogous to vital movements, the carting about to
mechanical movements.

Mechanical movements are of no interest to the psychologist, and it has
only been necessary to define them in order to be able to exclude them.
When a psychologist studies behaviour, it is only vital movements
that concern him. We shall, therefore, proceed to ignore mechanical
movements, and study only the properties of the remainder.

The next point is to distinguish between movements that are instinctive
and movements that are acquired by experience. This distinction also is
to some extent one of degree. Professor Lloyd Morgan gives the following
definition of "instinctive behaviour":

"That which is, on its first occurrence, independent of prior
experience; which tends to the well-being of the individual and the
preservation of the race; which is similarly performed by all members
of the same more or less restricted group of animals; and which may be
subject to subsequent modification under the guidance of experience." *

     * "Instinct and Experience" (Methuen, 1912) p. 5.

This definition is framed for the purposes of biology, and is in
some respects unsuited to the needs of psychology. Though perhaps
unavoidable, allusion to "the same more or less restricted group
of animals" makes it impossible to judge what is instinctive in the
behaviour of an isolated individual. Moreover, "the well-being of
the individual and the preservation of the race" is only a usual
characteristic, not a universal one, of the sort of movements that, from
our point of view, are to be called instinctive; instances of harmful
instincts will be given shortly. The essential point of the definition,
from our point of view, is that an instinctive movement is in dependent
of prior experience.

We may say that an "instinctive" movement is a vital movement performed
by an animal the first time that it finds itself in a novel situation;
or, more correctly, one which it would perform if the situation were
novel.* The instincts of an animal are different at different periods of
its growth, and this fact may cause changes of behaviour which are
not due to learning. The maturing and seasonal fluctuation of the
sex-instinct affords a good illustration. When the sex-instinct first
matures, the behaviour of an animal in the presence of a mate is
different from its previous behaviour in similar circumstances, but is
not learnt, since it is just the same if the animal has never previously
been in the presence of a mate.

     * Though this can only be decided by comparison with other
     members of the species, and thus exposes us to the need of
     comparison which we thought an objection to Professor Lloyd
     Morgan's definition.

On the other hand, a movement is "learnt," or embodies a "habit," if it
is due to previous experience of similar situations, and is not what it
would be if the animal had had no such experience.

There are various complications which blur the sharpness of this
distinction in practice. To begin with, many instincts mature gradually,
and while they are immature an animal may act in a fumbling manner which
is very difficult to distinguish from learning. James ("Psychology," ii,
407) maintains that children walk by instinct, and that the awkwardness
of their first attempts is only due to the fact that the instinct has
not yet ripened. He hopes that "some scientific widower, left alone with
his offspring at the critical moment, may ere long test this suggestion
on the living subject." However this may be, he quotes evidence to show
that "birds do not LEARN to fly," but fly by instinct when they reach
the appropriate age (ib., p. 406). In the second place, instinct often
gives only a rough outline of the sort of thing to do, in which case
learning is necessary in order to acquire certainty and precision in
action. In the third place, even in the clearest cases of acquired
habit, such as speaking, some instinct is required to set in motion
the process of learning. In the case of speaking, the chief instinct
involved is commonly supposed to be that of imitation, but this may be
questioned. (See Thorndike's "Animal Intelligence," p. 253 ff.)

In spite of these qualifications, the broad distinction between instinct
and habit is undeniable. To take extreme cases, every animal at birth
can take food by instinct, before it has had opportunity to learn; on
the other hand, no one can ride a bicycle by instinct, though, after
learning, the necessary movements become just as automatic as if they
were instinctive.

The process of learning, which consists in the acquisition of habits,
has been much studied in various animals.* For example: you put a hungry
animal, say a cat, in a cage which has a door that can be opened by
lifting a latch; outside the cage you put food. The cat at first dashes
all round the cage, making frantic efforts to force a way out. At last,
by accident, the latch is lifted and the cat pounces on the food. Next
day you repeat the experiment, and you find that the cat gets out much
more quickly than the first time, although it still makes some random
movements. The third day it gets out still more quickly, and before long
it goes straight to the latch and lifts it at once. Or you make a model
of the Hampton Court maze, and put a rat in the middle, assaulted by the
smell of food on the outside. The rat starts running down the passages,
and is constantly stopped by blind alleys, but at last, by persistent
attempts, it gets out. You repeat this experiment day after day; you
measure the time taken by the rat in reaching the food; you find that
the time rapidly diminishes, and that after a while the rat ceases to
make any wrong turnings. It is by essentially similar processes that we
learn speaking, writing, mathematics, or the government of an empire.

     * The scientific study of this subject may almost be said to
     begin with Thorndike's "Animal Intelligence" (Macmillan,
     1911).

Professor Watson ("Behavior," pp. 262-3) has an ingenious theory as to
the way in which habit arises out of random movements. I think there is
a reason why his theory cannot be regarded as alone sufficient, but it
seems not unlikely that it is partly correct. Suppose, for the sake of
simplicity, that there are just ten random movements which may be made
by the animal--say, ten paths down which it may go--and that only one of
these leads to food, or whatever else represents success in the case in
question. Then the successful movement always occurs during the animal's
attempts, whereas each of the others, on the average, occurs in only
half the attempts. Thus the tendency to repeat a previous performance
(which is easily explicable without the intervention of "consciousness")
leads to a greater emphasis on the successful movement than on any
other, and in time causes it alone to be performed. The objection to
this view, if taken as the sole explanation, is that on improvement
ought to set in till after the SECOND trial, whereas experiment shows
that already at the second attempt the animal does better than the
first time. Something further is, therefore, required to account for the
genesis of habit from random movements; but I see no reason to suppose
that what is further required involves "consciousness."

Mr. Thorndike (op. cit., p. 244) formulates two "provisional laws of
acquired behaviour or learning," as follows:

"The Law of Effect is that: Of several responses made to the same
situation, those which are accompanied or closely followed by
satisfaction to the animal will, other things being equal, be more
firmly connected with the situation, so that, when it recurs, they will
be more likely to recur; those which are accompanied or closely followed
by discomfort to the animal will, other things being equal, have their
connections with that situation weakened, so that, when it recurs,
they will be less likely to occur. The greater the satisfaction or
discomfort, the greater the strengthening or weakening of the bond.

"The Law of Exercise is that: Any response to a situation will, other
things being equal, be more strongly connected with the situation
in proportion to the number of times it has been connected with that
situation and to the average vigour and duration of the connections."

With the explanation to be presently given of the meaning of
"satisfaction" and "discomfort," there seems every reason to accept
these two laws.

What is true of animals, as regards instinct and habit, is equally
true of men. But the higher we rise in the evolutionary scale, broadly
speaking, the greater becomes the power of learning, and the fewer are
the occasions when pure instinct is exhibited unmodified in adult life.
This applies with great force to man, so much so that some have thought
instinct less important in the life of man than in that of animals.
This, however, would be a mistake. Learning is only possible when
instinct supplies the driving-force. The animals in cages, which
gradually learn to get out, perform random movements at first, which
are purely instinctive. But for these random movements, they would never
acquire the experience which afterwards enables them to produce the
right movement. (This is partly questioned by Hobhouse*--wrongly, I
think.) Similarly, children learning to talk make all sorts of sounds,
until one day the right sound comes by accident. It is clear that the
original making of random sounds, without which speech would never be
learnt, is instinctive. I think we may say the same of all the habits
and aptitudes that we acquire in all of them there has been present
throughout some instinctive activity, prompting at first rather
inefficient movements, but supplying the driving force while more and
more effective methods are being acquired. A cat which is hungry smells
fish, and goes to the larder. This is a thoroughly efficient method when
there is fish in the larder, and it is often successfully practised by
children. But in later life it is found that merely going to the larder
does not cause fish to be there; after a series of random movements it
is found that this result is to be caused by going to the City in the
morning and coming back in the evening. No one would have guessed a
priori that this movement of a middle-aged man's body would cause fish
to come out of the sea into his larder, but experience shows that it
does, and the middle-aged man therefore continues to go to the City,
just as the cat in the cage continues to lift the latch when it has once
found it. Of course, in actual fact, human learning is rendered easier,
though psychologically more complex, through language; but at bottom
language does not alter the essential character of learning, or of the
part played by instinct in promoting learning. Language, however, is a
subject upon which I do not wish to speak until a later lecture.

     * "Mind in Evolution" (Macmillan, 1915), pp. 236-237.

The popular conception of instinct errs by imagining it to be infallible
and preternaturally wise, as well as incapable of modification. This is
a complete delusion. Instinct, as a rule, is very rough and ready, able
to achieve its result under ordinary circumstances, but easily misled by
anything unusual. Chicks follow their mother by instinct, but when they
are quite young they will follow with equal readiness any moving
object remotely resembling their mother, or even a human being (James,
"Psychology," ii, 396). Bergson, quoting Fabre, has made play with the
supposed extraordinary accuracy of the solitary wasp Ammophila, which
lays its eggs in a caterpillar. On this subject I will quote from
Drever's "Instinct in Man," p. 92:

"According to Fabre's observations, which Bergson accepts, the Ammophila
stings its prey EXACTLY and UNERRINGLY in EACH of the nervous centres.
The result is that the caterpillar is paralyzed, but not immediately
killed, the advantage of this being that the larva cannot be injured by
any movement of the caterpillar, upon which the egg is deposited, and is
provided with fresh meat when the time comes.

"Now Dr. and Mrs. Peckham have shown that the sting of the wasp is NOT
UNERRING, as Fabre alleges, that the number of stings is NOT CONSTANT,
that sometimes the caterpillar is NOT PARALYZED, and sometimes it is
KILLED OUTRIGHT, and that THE DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES DO NOT APPARENTLY
MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE TO THE LARVA, which is not injured by slight
movements of the caterpillar, nor by consuming food decomposed rather
than fresh caterpillar."

This illustrates how love of the marvellous may mislead even so careful
an observer as Fabre and so eminent a philosopher as Bergson.

In the same chapter of Dr. Drever's book there are some interesting
examples of the mistakes made by instinct. I will quote one as a sample:

"The larva of the Lomechusa beetle eats the young of the ants, in whose
nest it is reared. Nevertheless, the ants tend the Lomechusa larvae
with the same care they bestow on their own young. Not only so, but they
apparently discover that the methods of feeding, which suit their own
larvae, would prove fatal to the guests, and accordingly they change
their whole system of nursing" (loc. cit., p. 106).

Semon ("Die Mneme," pp. 207-9) gives a good illustration of an instinct
growing wiser through experience. He relates how hunters attract stags
by imitating the sounds of other members of their species, male or
female, but find that the older a stag becomes the more difficult it
is to deceive him, and the more accurate the imitation has to be. The
literature of instinct is vast, and illustrations might be multiplied
indefinitely. The main points as regards instinct, which need to be
emphasized as against the popular conceptions of it, are:

(1) That instinct requires no prevision of the biological end which it
serves;

(2) That instinct is only adapted to achieve this end in the usual
circumstances of the animal in question, and has no more precision than
is necessary for success AS A RULE;

(3) That processes initiated by instinct often come to be performed
better after experience;

(4) That instinct supplies the impulses to experimental movements which
are required for the process of learning;

(5) That instincts in their nascent stages are easily modifiable, and
capable of being attached to various sorts of objects.

All the above characteristics of instinct can be established by purely
external observation, except the fact that instinct does not require
prevision. This, though not strictly capable of being PROVED by
observation, is irresistibly suggested by the most obvious phenomena.
Who can believe, for example, that a new-born baby is aware of the
necessity of food for preserving life? Or that insects, in laying eggs,
are concerned for the preservation of their species? The essence of
instinct, one might say, is that it provides a mechanism for
acting without foresight in a manner which is usually advantageous
biologically. It is partly for this reason that it is so important to
understand the fundamental position of instinct in prompting both animal
and human behaviour.




LECTURE III. DESIRE AND FEELING

Desire is a subject upon which, if I am not mistaken, true views can
only be arrived at by an almost complete reversal of the ordinary
unreflecting opinion. It is natural to regard desire as in its essence
an attitude towards something which is imagined, not actual; this
something is called the END or OBJECT of the desire, and is said to be
the PURPOSE of any action resulting from the desire. We think of the
content of the desire as being just like the content of a belief, while
the attitude taken up towards the content is different. According to
this theory, when we say: "I hope it will rain," or "I expect it will
rain," we express, in the first case, a desire, and in the second, a
belief, with an identical content, namely, the image of rain. It would
be easy to say that, just as belief is one kind of feeling in relation
to this content, so desire is another kind. According to this view, what
comes first in desire is something imagined, with a specific feeling
related to it, namely, that specific feeling which we call "desiring"
it. The discomfort associated with unsatisfied desire, and the actions
which aim at satisfying desire, are, in this view, both of them effects
of the desire. I think it is fair to say that this is a view against
which common sense would not rebel; nevertheless, I believe it to be
radically mistaken. It cannot be refuted logically, but various facts
can be adduced which make it gradually less simple and plausible, until
at last it turns out to be easier to abandon it wholly and look at the
matter in a totally different way.

The first set of facts to be adduced against the common sense view of
desire are those studied by psycho-analysis. In all human beings, but
most markedly in those suffering from hysteria and certain forms of
insanity, we find what are called "unconscious" desires, which are
commonly regarded as showing self-deception. Most psycho-analysts
pay little attention to the analysis of desire, being interested in
discovering by observation what it is that people desire, rather than in
discovering what actually constitutes desire. I think the strangeness of
what they report would be greatly diminished if it were expressed in the
language of a behaviourist theory of desire, rather than in the language
of every-day beliefs. The general description of the sort of phenomena
that bear on our present question is as follows: A person states that
his desires are so-and-so, and that it is these desires that inspire his
actions; but the outside observer perceives that his actions are such
as to realize quite different ends from those which he avows, and
that these different ends are such as he might be expected to desire.
Generally they are less virtuous than his professed desires, and are
therefore less agreeable to profess than these are. It is accordingly
supposed that they really exist as desires for ends, but in a
subconscious part of the mind, which the patient refuses to admit into
consciousness for fear of having to think ill of himself. There are
no doubt many cases to which such a supposition is applicable without
obvious artificiality. But the deeper the Freudians delve into the
underground regions of instinct, the further they travel from anything
resembling conscious desire, and the less possible it becomes to believe
that only positive self-deception conceals from us that we really wish
for things which are abhorrent to our explicit life.

In the cases in question we have a conflict between the outside observer
and the patient's consciousness. The whole tendency of psycho-analysis
is to trust the outside observer rather than the testimony of
introspection. I believe this tendency to be entirely right, but to
demand a re-statement of what constitutes desire, exhibiting it as a
causal law of our actions, not as something actually existing in our
minds.

But let us first get a clearer statement of the essential characteristic
of the phenomena.

A person, we find, states that he desires a certain end A, and that he
is acting with a view to achieving it. We observe, however, that his
actions are such as are likely to achieve a quite different end B, and
that B is the sort of end that often seems to be aimed at by animals and
savages, though civilized people are supposed to have discarded it. We
sometimes find also a whole set of false beliefs, of such a kind as to
persuade the patient that his actions are really a means to A, when in
fact they are a means to B. For example, we have an impulse to inflict
pain upon those whom we hate; we therefore believe that they are wicked,
and that punishment will reform them. This belief enables us to act upon
the impulse to inflict pain, while believing that we are acting upon
the desire to lead sinners to repentance. It is for this reason that the
criminal law has been in all ages more severe than it would have been if
the impulse to ameliorate the criminal had been what really inspired
it. It seems simple to explain such a state of affairs as due to
"self-deception," but this explanation is often mythical. Most people,
in thinking about punishment, have had no more need to hide their
vindictive impulses from themselves than they have had to hide
the exponential theorem. Our impulses are not patent to a casual
observation, but are only to be discovered by a scientific study of our
actions, in the course of which we must regard ourselves as objectively
as we should the motions of the planets or the chemical reactions of a
new element.

The study of animals reinforces this conclusion, and is in many ways
the best preparation for the analysis of desire. In animals we are
not troubled by the disturbing influence of ethical considerations. In
dealing with human beings, we are perpetually distracted by being told
that such-and-such a view is gloomy or cynical or pessimistic: ages of
human conceit have built up such a vast myth as to our wisdom and virtue
that any intrusion of the mere scientific desire to know the facts is
instantly resented by those who cling to comfortable illusions. But no
one cares whether animals are virtuous or not, and no one is under the
delusion that they are rational. Moreover, we do not expect them to be
so "conscious," and are prepared to admit that their instincts prompt
useful actions without any prevision of the ends which they achieve. For
all these reasons, there is much in the analysis of mind which is more
easily discovered by the study of animals than by the observation of
human beings.

We all think that, by watching the behaviour of animals, we can discover
more or less what they desire. If this is the case--and I fully agree
that it is--desire must be capable of being exhibited in actions, for it
is only the actions of animals that we can observe. They MAY have minds
in which all sorts of things take place, but we can know nothing about
their minds except by means of inferences from their actions; and the
more such inferences are examined, the more dubious they appear. It
would seem, therefore, that actions alone must be the test of the
desires of animals. From this it is an easy step to the conclusion that
an animal's desire is nothing but a characteristic of a certain series
of actions, namely, those which would be commonly regarded as inspired
by the desire in question. And when it has been shown that this view
affords a satisfactory account of animal desires, it is not difficult
to see that the same explanation is applicable to the desires of human
beings.

We judge easily from the behaviour of an animal of a familiar
kind whether it is hungry or thirsty, or pleased or displeased, or
inquisitive or terrified. The verification of our judgment, so far
as verification is possible, must be derived from the immediately
succeeding actions of the animal. Most people would say that they infer
first something about the animal's state of mind--whether it is hungry
or thirsty and so on--and thence derive their expectations as to its
subsequent conduct. But this detour through the animal's supposed mind
is wholly unnecessary. We can say simply: The animal's behaviour during
the last minute has had those characteristics which distinguish what
is called "hunger," and it is likely that its actions during the next
minute will be similar in this respect, unless it finds food, or is
interrupted by a stronger impulse, such as fear. An animal which is
hungry is restless, it goes to the places where food is often to be
found, it sniffs with its nose or peers with its eyes or otherwise
increases the sensitiveness of its sense-organs; as soon as it is near
enough to food for its sense-organs to be affected, it goes to it with
all speed and proceeds to eat; after which, if the quantity of food has
been sufficient, its whole demeanour changes it may very likely lie
down and go to sleep. These things and others like them are observable
phenomena distinguishing a hungry animal from one which is not hungry.
The characteristic mark by which we recognize a series of actions
which display hunger is not the animal's mental state, which we cannot
observe, but something in its bodily behaviour; it is this observable
trait in the bodily behaviour that I am proposing to call "hunger,"
not some possibly mythical and certainly unknowable ingredient of the
animal's mind.

Generalizing what occurs in the case of hunger, we may say that what
we call a desire in an animal is always displayed in a cycle of actions
having certain fairly well marked characteristics. There is first a
state of activity, consisting, with qualifications to be mentioned
presently, of movements likely to have a certain result; these
movements, unless interrupted, continue until the result is achieved,
after which there is usually a period of comparative quiescence. A cycle
of actions of this sort has marks by which it is broadly distinguished
from the motions of dead matter. The most notable of these marks
are--(1) the appropriateness of the actions for the realization of a
certain result; (2) the continuance of action until that result has been
achieved. Neither of these can be pressed beyond a point. Either may
be (a) to some extent present in dead matter, and (b) to a considerable
extent absent in animals, while vegetable are intermediate, and display
only a much fainter form of the behaviour which leads us to attribute
desire to animals. (a) One might say rivers "desire" the sea water,
roughly speaking, remains in restless motion until it reaches either
the sea or a place from which it cannot issue without going uphill, and
therefore we might say that this is what it wishes while it is flowing.
We do not say so, because we can account for the behaviour of water by
the laws of physics; and if we knew more about animals, we might equally
cease to attribute desires to them, since we might find physical and
chemical reactions sufficient to account for their behaviour. (b) Many
of the movements of animals do not exhibit the characteristics of the
cycles which seem to embody desire. There are first of all the movements
which are "mechanical," such as slipping and falling, where ordinary
physical forces operate upon the animal's body almost as if it were
dead matter. An animal which falls over a cliff may make a number of
desperate struggles while it is in the air, but its centre of gravity
will move exactly as it would if the animal were dead. In this case, if
the animal is killed at the end of the fall, we have, at first sight,
just the characteristics of a cycle of actions embodying desire, namely,
restless movement until the ground is reached, and then quiescence.
Nevertheless, we feel no temptation to say that the animal desired what
occurred, partly because of the obviously mechanical nature of the whole
occurrence, partly because, when an animal survives a fall, it tends not
to repeat the experience.

There may be other reasons also, but of them I do not wish to speak yet.
Besides mechanical movements, there are interrupted movements, as when
a bird, on its way to eat your best peas, is frightened away by the boy
whom you are employing for that purpose. If interruptions are frequent
and completion of cycles rare, the characteristics by which cycles
are observed may become so blurred as to be almost unrecognizable. The
result of these various considerations is that the differences
between animals and dead matter, when we confine ourselves to external
unscientific observation of integral behaviour, are a matter of degree
and not very precise. It is for this reason that it has always been
possible for fanciful people to maintain that even stocks and stones
have some vague kind of soul. The evidence that animals have souls is
so very shaky that, if it is assumed to be conclusive, one might just as
well go a step further and extend the argument by analogy to all matter.
Nevertheless, in spite of vagueness and doubtful cases, the existence
of cycles in the behaviour of animals is a broad characteristic by which
they are prima facie distinguished from ordinary matter; and I think it
is this characteristic which leads us to attribute desires to animals,
since it makes their behaviour resemble what we do when (as we say) we
are acting from desire.

I shall adopt the following definitions for describing the behaviour of
animals:

A "behaviour-cycle" is a series of voluntary or reflex movements of an
animal, tending to cause a certain result, and continuing until that
result is caused, unless they are interrupted by death, accident,
or some new behaviour-cycle. (Here "accident" may be defined as the
intervention of purely physical laws causing mechanical movements.)

The "purpose" of a behaviour-cycle is the result which brings it to an
end, normally by a condition of temporary quiescence-provided there is
no interruption.

An animal is said to "desire" the purpose of a behaviour cycle while the
behaviour-cycle is in progress.

I believe these definitions to be adequate also to human purposes and
desires, but for the present I am only occupied with animals and with
what can be learnt by external observation. I am very anxious that no
ideas should be attached to the words "purpose" and "desire" beyond
those involved in the above definitions.

We have not so far considered what is the nature of the initial stimulus
to a behaviour-cycle. Yet it is here that the usual view of desire seems
on the strongest ground. The hungry animal goes on making movements
until it gets food; it seems natural, therefore, to suppose that the
idea of food is present throughout the process, and that the thought of
the end to be achieved sets the whole process in motion. Such a view,
however, is obviously untenable in many cases, especially where instinct
is concerned. Take, for example, reproduction and the rearing of the
young. Birds mate, build a nest, lay eggs in it, sit on the eggs, feed
the young birds, and care for them until they are fully grown. It
is totally impossible to suppose that this series of actions, which
constitutes one behaviour-cycle, is inspired by any prevision of the
end, at any rate the first time it is performed.* We must suppose that
the stimulus to the performance of each act is an impulsion from behind,
not an attraction from the future. The bird does what it does, at each
stage, because it has an impulse to that particular action, not because
it perceives that the whole cycle of actions will contribute to the
preservation of the species. The same considerations apply to other
instincts. A hungry animal feels restless, and is led by instinctive
impulses to perform the movements which give it nourishment; but the act
of seeking food is not sufficient evidence from which to conclude that
the animal has the thought of food in its "mind."

     * For evidence as to birds' nests, cf. Semon, "Die Mneme,"
     pp. 209, 210.

Coming now to human beings, and to what we know about our own actions,
it seems clear that what, with us, sets a behaviour-cycle in motion is
some sensation of the sort which we call disagreeable. Take the case
of hunger: we have first an uncomfortable feeling inside, producing a
disinclination to sit still, a sensitiveness to savoury smells, and an
attraction towards any food that there may be in our neighbourhood. At
any moment during this process we may become aware that we are hungry,
in the sense of saying to ourselves, "I am hungry"; but we may have been
acting with reference to food for some time before this moment. While we
are talking or reading, we may eat in complete unconsciousness; but we
perform the actions of eating just as we should if we were conscious,
and they cease when our hunger is appeased. What we call "consciousness"
seems to be a mere spectator of the process; even when it issues orders,
they are usually, like those of a wise parent, just such as would have
been obeyed even if they had not been given. This view may seem at first
exaggerated, but the more our so-called volitions and their causes are
examined, the more it is forced upon us. The part played by words in all
this is complicated, and a potent source of confusions; I shall return
to it later. For the present, I am still concerned with primitive
desire, as it exists in man, but in the form in which man shows his
affinity to his animal ancestors.

Conscious desire is made up partly of what is essential to desire,
partly of beliefs as to what we want. It is important to be clear as to
the part which does not consist of beliefs.

The primitive non-cognitive element in desire seems to be a push, not
a pull, an impulsion away from the actual, rather than an attraction
towards the ideal. Certain sensations and other mental occurrences have
a property which we call discomfort; these cause such bodily movements
as are likely to lead to their cessation. When the discomfort ceases,
or even when it appreciably diminishes, we have sensations possessing a
property which we call PLEASURE. Pleasurable sensations either stimulate
no action at all, or at most stimulate such action as is likely to
prolong them. I shall return shortly to the consideration of what
discomfort and pleasure are in themselves; for the present, it is
their connection with action and desire that concerns us. Abandoning
momentarily the standpoint of behaviourism, we may presume that hungry
animals experience sensations involving discomfort, and stimulating such
movements as seem likely to bring them to the food which is outside the
cages. When they have reached the food and eaten it, their discomfort
ceases and their sensations become pleasurable. It SEEMS, mistakenly, as
if the animals had had this situation in mind throughout, when in fact
they have been continually pushed by discomfort. And when an animal
is reflective, like some men, it comes to think that it had the final
situation in mind throughout; sometimes it comes to know what situation
will bring satisfaction, so that in fact the discomfort does bring the
thought of what will allay it. Nevertheless the sensation involving
discomfort remains the prime mover.

This brings us to the question of the nature of discomfort and pleasure.
Since Kant it has been customary to recognize three great divisions of
mental phenomena, which are typified by knowledge, desire and feeling,
where "feeling" is used to mean pleasure and discomfort. Of course,
"knowledge" is too definite a word: the states of mind concerned are
grouped together as "cognitive," and are to embrace not only beliefs,
but perceptions, doubts, and the understanding of concepts. "Desire,"
also, is narrower than what is intended: for example, WILL is to be
included in this category, and in fact every thing that involves any
kind of striving, or "conation" as it is technically called. I do not
myself believe that there is any value in this threefold division of the
contents of mind. I believe that sensations (including images) supply
all the "stuff" of the mind, and that everything else can be analysed
into groups of sensations related in various ways, or characteristics of
sensations or of groups of sensations. As regards belief, I shall give
grounds for this view in later lectures. As regards desires, I have
given some grounds in this lecture. For the present, it is pleasure and
discomfort that concern us. There are broadly three theories that might
be held in regard to them. We may regard them as separate existing
items in those who experience them, or we may regard them as intrinsic
qualities of sensations and other mental occurrences, or we may regard
them as mere names for the causal characteristics of the occurrences
which are uncomfortable or pleasant. The first of these theories,
namely, that which regards discomfort and pleasure as actual contents in
those who experience them, has, I think, nothing conclusive to be said
in its favour.* It is suggested chiefly by an ambiguity in the word
"pain," which has misled many people, including Berkeley, whom it
supplied with one of his arguments for subjective idealism. We may use
"pain" as the opposite of "pleasure," and "painful" as the opposite of
"pleasant," or we may use "pain" to mean a certain sort of sensation, on
a level with the sensations of heat and cold and touch. The latter use
of the word has prevailed in psychological literature, and it is now
no longer used as the opposite of "pleasure." Dr. H. Head, in a recent
publication, has stated this distinction as follows:**

     * Various arguments in its favour are advanced by A.
     Wohlgemuth, "On the feelings and their neural correlate,
     with an examination of the nature of pain," "British Journal
     of Psychology," viii, 4. (1917). But as these arguments are
     largely a reductio ad absurdum of other theories, among
     which that which I am advocating is not included, I cannot
     regard them as establishing their contention.

     ** "Sensation and the Cerebral Cortex," "Brain," vol. xli,
     part ii (September, 1918), p. 90. Cf. also Wohlgemuth, loc.
     cit. pp. 437, 450.

"It is necessary at the outset to distinguish clearly between
'discomfort' and 'pain.' Pain is a distinct sensory quality equivalent
to heat and cold, and its intensity can be roughly graded according to
the force expended in stimulation. Discomfort, on the other hand,
is that feeling-tone which is directly opposed to pleasure. It may
accompany sensations not in themselves essentially painful; as for
instance that produced by tickling the sole of the foot. The reaction
produced by repeated pricking contains both these elements; for it
evokes that sensory quality known as pain, accompanied by a disagreeable
feeling-tone, which we have called discomfort. On the other hand,
excessive pressure, except when applied directly over some nerve-trunk,
tends to excite more discomfort than pain."

The confusion between discomfort and pain has made people regard
discomfort as a more substantial thing than it is, and this in turn has
reacted upon the view taken of pleasure, since discomfort and pleasure
are evidently on a level in this respect. As soon as discomfort is
clearly distinguished from the sensation of pain, it becomes more
natural to regard discomfort and pleasure as properties of mental
occurrences than to regard them as separate mental occurrences on their
own account. I shall therefore dismiss the view that they are separate
mental occurrences, and regard them as properties of such experiences as
would be called respectively uncomfortable and pleasant.

It remains to be examined whether they are actual qualities of such
occurrences, or are merely differences as to causal properties. I do not
myself see any way of deciding this question; either view seems equally
capable of accounting for the facts. If this is true, it is safer to
avoid the assumption that there are such intrinsic qualities of
mental occurrences as are in question, and to assume only the causal
differences which are undeniable. Without condemning the intrinsic
theory, we can define discomfort and pleasure as consisting in causal
properties, and say only what will hold on either of the two theories.
Following this course, we shall say:

"Discomfort" is a property of a sensation or other mental occurrence,
consisting in the fact that the occurrence in question stimulates
voluntary or reflex movements tending to produce some more or less
definite change involving the cessation of the occurrence.

"Pleasure" is a property of a sensation or other mental occurrence,
consisting in the fact that the occurrence in question either does not
stimulate any voluntary or reflex movement, or, if it does, stimulates
only such as tend to prolong the occurrence in question.*

     * Cf. Thorndike, op. cit., p. 243.

"Conscious" desire, which we have now to consider, consists of desire
in the sense hitherto discussed, together with a true belief as to its
"purpose," i.e. as to the state of affairs that will bring quiescence
with cessation of the discomfort. If our theory of desire is correct,
a belief as to its purpose may very well be erroneous, since only
experience can show what causes a discomfort to cease. When the
experience needed is common and simple, as in the case of hunger, a
mistake is not very probable. But in other cases--e.g. erotic desire in
those who have had little or no experience of its satisfaction--mistakes
are to be expected, and do in fact very often occur. The practice of
inhibiting impulses, which is to a great extent necessary to civilized
life, makes mistakes easier, by preventing experience of the actions to
which a desire would otherwise lead, and by often causing the inhibited
impulses themselves to be unnoticed or quickly forgotten. The perfectly
natural mistakes which thus arise constitute a large proportion of what
is, mistakenly in part, called self-deception, and attributed by Freud
to the "censor."

But there is a further point which needs emphasizing, namely, that a
belief that something is desired has often a tendency to cause the very
desire that is believed in. It is this fact that makes the effect of
"consciousness" on desire so complicated.

When we believe that we desire a certain state of affairs, that often
tends to cause a real desire for it. This is due partly to the influence
of words upon our emotions, in rhetoric for example, and partly to the
general fact that discomfort normally belongs to the belief that we
desire such-and-such a thing that we do not possess. Thus what was
originally a false opinion as to the object of a desire acquires a
certain truth: the false opinion generates a secondary subsidiary
desire, which nevertheless becomes real. Let us take an illustration.
Suppose you have been jilted in a way which wounds your vanity. Your
natural impulsive desire will be of the sort expressed in Donne's poem:

     When by thy scorn, O Murderess, I am dead,

in which he explains how he will haunt the poor lady as a ghost, and
prevent her from enjoying a moment's peace. But two things stand in
the way of your expressing yourself so naturally: on the one hand, your
vanity, which will not acknowledge how hard you are hit; on the other
hand, your conviction that you are a civilized and humane person,
who could not possibly indulge so crude a desire as revenge. You will
therefore experience a restlessness which will at first seem quite
aimless, but will finally resolve itself in a conscious desire to change
your profession, or go round the world, or conceal your identity and
live in Putney, like Arnold Bennett's hero. Although the prime cause of
this desire is a false judgment as to your previous unconscious desire,
yet the new conscious desire has its own derivative genuineness, and may
influence your actions to the extent of sending you round the world.
The initial mistake, however, will have effects of two kinds. First,
in uncontrolled moments, under the influence of sleepiness or drink
or delirium, you will say things calculated to injure the faithless
deceiver. Secondly, you will find travel disappointing, and the East
less fascinating than you had hoped--unless, some day, you hear that the
wicked one has in turn been jilted. If this happens, you will believe
that you feel sincere sympathy, but you will suddenly be much more
delighted than before with the beauties of tropical islands or the
wonders of Chinese art. A secondary desire, derived from a false
judgment as to a primary desire, has its own power of influencing
action, and is therefore a real desire according to our definition.
But it has not the same power as a primary desire of bringing thorough
satisfaction when it is realized; so long as the primary desire remains
unsatisfied, restlessness continues in spite of the secondary desire's
success. Hence arises a belief in the vanity of human wishes: the vain
wishes are those that are secondary, but mistaken beliefs prevent us
from realizing that they are secondary.

What may, with some propriety, be called self-deception arises through
the operation of desires for beliefs. We desire many things which it is
not in our power to achieve: that we should be universally popular and
admired, that our work should be the wonder of the age, and that the
universe should be so ordered as to bring ultimate happiness to all,
though not to our enemies until they have repented and been purified
by suffering. Such desires are too large to be achieved through our own
efforts. But it is found that a considerable portion of the satisfaction
which these things would bring us if they were realized is to be
achieved by the much easier operation of believing that they are or
will be realized. This desire for beliefs, as opposed to desire for the
actual facts, is a particular case of secondary desire, and, like all
secondary desire its satisfaction does not lead to a complete cessation
of the initial discomfort. Nevertheless, desire for beliefs, as opposed
to desire for facts, is exceedingly potent both individually and
socially. According to the form of belief desired, it is called vanity,
optimism, or religion. Those who have sufficient power usually imprison
or put to death any one who tries to shake their faith in their own
excellence or in that of the universe; it is for this reason that
seditious libel and blasphemy have always been, and still are, criminal
offences.

It is very largely through desires for beliefs that the primitive
nature of desire has become so hidden, and that the part played by
consciousness has been so confusing and so exaggerated.

We may now summarize our analysis of desire and feeling.

A mental occurrence of any kind--sensation, image, belief, or
emotion--may be a cause of a series of actions, continuing, unless
interrupted, until some more or less definite state of affairs is
realized. Such a series of actions we call a "behaviour-cycle." The
degree of definiteness may vary greatly: hunger requires only food in
general, whereas the sight of a particular piece of food raises a desire
which requires the eating of that piece of food. The property of causing
such a cycle of occurrences is called "discomfort"; the property of the
mental occurrences in which the cycle ends is called "pleasure." The
actions constituting the cycle must not be purely mechanical, i.e. they
must be bodily movements in whose causation the special properties
of nervous tissue are involved. The cycle ends in a condition of
quiescence, or of such action as tends only to preserve the status quo.
The state of affairs in which this condition of quiescence is achieved
is called the "purpose" of the cycle, and the initial mental occurrence
involving discomfort is called a "desire" for the state of affairs that
brings quiescence. A desire is called "conscious" when it is accompanied
by a true belief as to the state of affairs that will bring quiescence;
otherwise it is called "unconscious." All primitive desire is
unconscious, and in human beings beliefs as to the purposes of desires
are often mistaken. These mistaken beliefs generate secondary desires,
which cause various interesting complications in the psychology of human
desire, without fundamentally altering the character which it shares
with animal desire.




LECTURE IV. INFLUENCE OF PAST HISTORY ON PRESENT OCCURRENCES IN LIVING
ORGANISMS

In this lecture we shall be concerned with a very general characteristic
which broadly, though not absolutely, distinguishes the behaviour
of living organisms from that of dead matter. The characteristic in
question is this:

The response of an organism to a given stimulus is very often dependent
upon the past history of the organism, and not merely upon the stimulus
and the HITHERTO DISCOVERABLE present state of the organism.

This characteristic is embodied in the saying "a burnt child fears the
fire." The burn may have left no visible traces, yet it modifies the
reaction of the child in the presence of fire. It is customary to assume
that, in such cases, the past operates by modifying the structure of the
brain, not directly. I have no wish to suggest that this hypothesis is
false; I wish only to point out that it is a hypothesis. At the end of
the present lecture I shall examine the grounds in its favour. If we
confine ourselves to facts which have been actually observed, we must
say that past occurrences, in addition to the present stimulus and
the present ascertainable condition of the organism, enter into the
causation of the response.

The characteristic is not wholly confined to living organisms. For
example, magnetized steel looks just like steel which has not been
magnetized, but its behaviour is in some ways different. In the case
of dead matter, however, such phenomena are less frequent and important
than in the case of living organisms, and it is far less difficult
to invent satisfactory hypotheses as to the microscopic changes of
structure which mediate between the past occurrence and the present
changed response. In the case of living organisms, practically
everything that is distinctive both of their physical and of their
mental behaviour is bound up with this persistent influence of the past.
Further, speaking broadly, the change in response is usually of a kind
that is biologically advantageous to the organism.

Following a suggestion derived from Semon ("Die Mneme," Leipzig, 1904;
2nd edition, 1908, English translation, Allen & Unwin, 1921; "Die
mnemischen Empfindungen," Leipzig, 1909), we will give the name of
"mnemic phenomena" to those responses of an organism which, so far as
hitherto observed facts are concerned, can only be brought under causal
laws by including past occurrences in the history of the organism as
part of the causes of the present response. I do not mean merely--what
would always be the case--that past occurrences are part of a CHAIN of
causes leading to the present event. I mean that, in attempting to state
the PROXIMATE cause of the present event, some past event or events
must be included, unless we take refuge in hypothetical modifications of
brain structure. For example: you smell peat-smoke, and you recall some
occasion when you smelt it before. The cause of your recollection, so
far as hitherto observable phenomena are concerned, consists both
of the peat smoke (present stimulus) and of the former occasion (past
experience). The same stimulus will not produce the same recollection
in another man who did not share your former experience, although the
former experience left no OBSERVABLE traces in the structure of the
brain. According to the maxim "same cause, same effect," we cannot
therefore regard the peat-smoke alone as the cause of your recollection,
since it does not have the same effect in other cases. The cause of
your recollection must be both the peat-smoke and the past occurrence.
Accordingly your recollection is an instance of what we are calling
"mnemic phenomena."

Before going further, it will be well to give illustrations of different
classes of mnemic phenomena.

(a) ACQUIRED HABITS.--In Lecture II we saw how animals can learn by
experience how to get out of cages or mazes, or perform other actions
which are useful to them but not provided for by their instincts alone.
A cat which is put into a cage of which it has had experience behaves
differently from the way in which it behaved at first. We can easily
invent hypotheses, which are quite likely to be true, as to connections
in the brain caused by past experience, and themselves causing the
different response. But the observable fact is that the stimulus of
being in the cage produces differing results with repetition, and that
the ascertainable cause of the cat's behaviour is not merely the cage
and its own ascertainable organization, but also its past history
in regard to the cage. From our present point of view, the matter is
independent of the question whether the cat's behaviour is due to some
mental fact called "knowledge," or displays a merely bodily habit. Our
habitual knowledge is not always in our minds, but is called up by the
appropriate stimuli. If we are asked "What is the capital of France?"
we answer "Paris," because of past experience; the past experience is as
essential as the present question in the causation of our response. Thus
all our habitual knowledge consists of acquired habits, and comes under
the head of mnemic phenomena.

(b) IMAGES.--I shall have much to say about images in a later lecture;
for the present I am merely concerned with them in so far as they are
"copies" of past sensations. When you hear New York spoken of, some
image probably comes into your mind, either of the place itself (if you
have been there), or of some picture of it (if you have not). The image
is due to your past experience, as well as to the present stimulus of
the words "New York." Similarly, the images you have in dreams are
all dependent upon your past experience, as well as upon the present
stimulus to dreaming. It is generally believed that all images, in their
simpler parts, are copies of sensations; if so, their mnemic character
is evident. This is important, not only on its own account, but also
because, as we shall see later, images play an essential part in what is
called "thinking."

(c) ASSOCIATION.--The broad fact of association, on the mental side, is
that when we experience something which we have experienced before,
it tends to call up the context of the former experience. The smell of
peat-smoke recalling a former scene is an instance which we discussed a
moment ago. This is obviously a mnemic phenomenon. There is also a more
purely physical association, which is indistinguishable from physical
habit. This is the kind studied by Mr. Thorndike in animals, where a
certain stimulus is associated with a certain act. This is the sort
which is taught to soldiers in drilling, for example. In such a case
there need not be anything mental, but merely a habit of the body.
There is no essential distinction between association and habit, and the
observations which we made concerning habit as a mnemic phenomenon are
equally applicable to association.

(d) NON-SENSATIONAL ELEMENTS IN PERCEPTION.--When we perceive any object
of a familiar kind, much of what appears subjectively to be immediately
given is really derived from past experience. When we see an object, say
a penny, we seem to be aware of its "real" shape we have the impression
of something circular, not of something elliptical. In learning to draw,
it is necessary to acquire the art of representing things according
to the sensation, not according to the perception. And the visual
appearance is filled out with feeling of what the object would be like
to touch, and so on. This filling out and supplying of the "real" shape
and so on consists of the most usual correlates of the sensational core
in our perception. It may happen that, in the particular case, the real
correlates are unusual; for example, if what we are seeing is a
carpet made to look like tiles. If so, the non-sensational part of our
perception will be illusory, i.e. it will supply qualities which the
object in question does not in fact have. But as a rule objects do
have the qualities added by perception, which is to be expected,
since experience of what is usual is the cause of the addition. If our
experience had been different, we should not fill out sensation in
the same way, except in so far as the filling out is instinctive,
not acquired. It would seem that, in man, all that makes up space
perception, including the correlation of sight and touch and so on, is
almost entirely acquired. In that case there is a large mnemic element
in all the common perceptions by means of which we handle common
objects. And, to take another kind of instance, imagine what our
astonishment would be if we were to hear a cat bark or a dog mew. This
emotion would be dependent upon past experience, and would therefore be
a mnemic phenomenon according to the definition.

(e) MEMORY AS KNOWLEDGE.--The kind of memory of which I am now speaking
is definite knowledge of some past event in one's own experience.
From time to time we remember things that have happened to us, because
something in the present reminds us of them. Exactly the same present
fact would not call up the same memory if our past experience had been
different. Thus our remembering is caused by--

(1) The present stimulus,

(2) The past occurrence.

It is therefore a mnemic phenomenon according to our definition. A
definition of "mnemic phenomena" which did not include memory would,
of course, be a bad one. The point of the definition is not that it
includes memory, but that it includes it as one of a class of phenomena
which embrace all that is characteristic in the subject matter of
psychology.

(f) EXPERIENCE.--The word "experience" is often used very vaguely.
James, as we saw, uses it to cover the whole primal stuff of the world,
but this usage seems objection able, since, in a purely physical world,
things would happen without there being any experience. It is only
mnemic phenomena that embody experience. We may say that an animal
"experiences" an occurrence when this occurrence modifies the animal's
subsequent behaviour, i.e. when it is the mnemic portion of the cause of
future occurrences in the animal's life. The burnt child that fears the
fire has "experienced" the fire, whereas a stick that has been thrown on
and taken off again has not "experienced" anything, since it offers
no more resistance than before to being thrown on. The essence of
"experience" is the modification of behaviour produced by what is
experienced. We might, in fact, define one chain of experience, or one
biography, as a series of occurrences linked by mnemic causation. I
think it is this characteristic, more than any other, that distinguishes
sciences dealing with living organisms from physics.

The best writer on mnemic phenomena known to me is Richard Semon, the
fundamental part of whose theory I shall endeavour to summarize before
going further:

When an organism, either animal or plant, is subjected to a stimulus,
producing in it some state of excitement, the removal of the stimulus
allows it to return to a condition of equilibrium. But the new state
of equilibrium is different from the old, as may be seen by the changed
capacity for reaction. The state of equilibrium before the stimulus may
be called the "primary indifference-state"; that after the cessation
of the stimulus, the "secondary indifference-state." We define the
"engraphic effect" of a stimulus as the effect in making a difference
between the primary and secondary indifference-states, and this
difference itself we define as the "engram" due to the stimulus. "Mnemic
phenomena" are defined as those due to engrams; in animals, they are
specially associated with the nervous system, but not exclusively, even
in man.

When two stimuli occur together, one of them, occurring afterwards,
may call out the reaction for the other also. We call this an "ekphoric
influence," and stimuli having this character are called "ekphoric
stimuli." In such a case we call the engrams of the two stimuli
"associated." All simultaneously generated engrams are associated; there
is also association of successively aroused engrams, though this is
reducible to simultaneous association. In fact, it is not an isolated
stimulus that leaves an engram, but the totality of the stimuli at any
moment; consequently any portion of this totality tends, if it recurs,
to arouse the whole reaction which was aroused before. Semon holds that
engrams can be inherited, and that an animal's innate habits may be due
to the experience of its ancestors; on this subject he refers to Samuel
Butler.

Semon formulates two "mnemic principles." The first, or "Law of
Engraphy," is as follows: "All simultaneous excitements in an organism
form a connected simultaneous excitement-complex, which as such works
engraphically, i.e. leaves behind a connected engram-complex, which
in so far forms a whole" ("Die mnemischen Empfindungen," p. 146).
The second mnemic principle, or "Law of Ekphory," is as follows:
"The partial return of the energetic situation which formerly worked
engraphically operates ekphorically on a simultaneous engram-complex"
(ib., p. 173). These two laws together represent in part a hypothesis
(the engram), and in part an observable fact. The observable fact is
that, when a certain complex of stimuli has originally caused a certain
complex of reactions, the recurrence of part of the stimuli tends to
cause the recurrence of the whole of the reactions.

Semon's applications of his fundamental ideas in various directions are
interesting and ingenious. Some of them will concern us later, but for
the present it is the fundamental character of mnemic phenomena that is
in question.

Concerning the nature of an engram, Semon confesses that at present it
is impossible to say more than that it must consist in some material
alteration in the body of the organism ("Die mnemischen Empfindungen,"
p. 376). It is, in fact, hypothetical, invoked for theoretical uses, and
not an outcome of direct observation. No doubt physiology, especially
the disturbances of memory through lesions in the brain, affords grounds
for this hypothesis; nevertheless it does remain a hypothesis, the
validity of which will be discussed at the end of this lecture.

I am inclined to think that, in the present state of physiology, the
introduction of the engram does not serve to simplify the account of
mnemic phenomena. We can, I think, formulate the known laws of such
phenomena in terms, wholly, of observable facts, by recognizing
provisionally what we may call "mnemic causation." By this I mean that
kind of causation of which I spoke at the beginning of this lecture,
that kind, namely, in which the proximate cause consists not merely of a
present event, but of this together with a past event. I do not wish to
urge that this form of causation is ultimate, but that, in the present
state of our knowledge, it affords a simplification, and enables us
to state laws of behaviour in less hypothetical terms than we should
otherwise have to employ.

The clearest instance of what I mean is recollection of a past event.
What we observe is that certain present stimuli lead us to recollect
certain occurrences, but that at times when we are not recollecting
them, there is nothing discoverable in our minds that could be called
memory of them. Memories, as mental facts, arise from time to time,
but do not, so far as we can see, exist in any shape while they are
"latent." In fact, when we say that they are "latent," we mean merely
that they will exist under certain circumstances. If, then, there is
to be some standing difference between the person who can remember a
certain fact and the person who cannot, that standing difference must
be, not in anything mental, but in the brain. It is quite probable that
there is such a difference in the brain, but its nature is unknown and
it remains hypothetical. Everything that has, so far, been made matter
of observation as regards this question can be put together in the
statement: When a certain complex of sensations has occurred to a man,
the recurrence of part of the complex tends to arouse the recollection
of the whole. In like manner, we can collect all mnemic phenomena in
living organisms under a single law, which contains what is hitherto
verifiable in Semon's two laws. This single law is:

IF A COMPLEX STIMULUS A HAS CAUSED A COMPLEX REACTION B IN AN ORGANISM,
THE OCCURRENCE OF A PART OF A ON A FUTURE OCCASION TENDS TO CAUSE THE
WHOLE REACTION B.

This law would need to be supplemented by some account of the influence
of frequency, and so on; but it seems to contain the essential
characteristic of mnemic phenomena, without admixture of anything
hypothetical.

Whenever the effect resulting from a stimulus to an organism differs
according to the past history of the organism, without our being able
actually to detect any relevant difference in its present structure,
we will speak of "mnemic causation," provided we can discover laws
embodying the influence of the past. In ordinary physical causation,
as it appears to common sense, we have approximate uniformities of
sequence, such as "lightning is followed by thunder," "drunkenness
is followed by headache," and so on. None of these sequences are
theoretically invariable, since something may intervene to disturb
them. In order to obtain invariable physical laws, we have to proceed to
differential equations, showing the direction of change at each moment,
not the integral change after a finite interval, however short. But
for the purposes of daily life many sequences are to all in tents and
purposes invariable. With the behaviour of human beings, however, this
is by no means the case. If you say to an Englishman, "You have a smut
on your nose," he will proceed to remove it, but there will be no such
effect if you say the same thing to a Frenchman who knows no English.
The effect of words upon the hearer is a mnemic phenomena, since it
depends upon the past experience which gave him understanding of the
words. If there are to be purely psychological causal laws, taking no
account of the brain and the rest of the body, they will have to be of
the form, not "X now causes Y now," but--

"A, B, C,... in the past, together with X now, cause Y now." For it
cannot be successfully maintained that our understanding of a word, for
example, is an actual existent content of the mind at times when we
are not thinking of the word. It is merely what may be called a
"disposition," i.e. it is capable of being aroused whenever we hear the
word or happen to think of it. A "disposition" is not something actual,
but merely the mnemic portion of a mnemic causal law.

In such a law as "A, B, C,... in the past, together with X now, cause
Y now," we will call A, B, C,... the mnemic cause, X the occasion or
stimulus, and Y the reaction. All cases in which experience influences
behaviour are instances of mnemic causation.

Believers in psycho-physical parallelism hold that psychology can
theoretically be freed entirely from all dependence on physiology or
physics. That is to say, they believe that every psychical event has
a psychical cause and a physical concomitant. If there is to be
parallelism, it is easy to prove by mathematical logic that the
causation in physical and psychical matters must be of the same sort,
and it is impossible that mnemic causation should exist in psychology
but not in physics. But if psychology is to be independent of
physiology, and if physiology can be reduced to physics, it would seem
that mnemic causation is essential in psychology. Otherwise we shall be
compelled to believe that all our knowledge, all our store of images
and memories, all our mental habits, are at all times existing in some
latent mental form, and are not merely aroused by the stimuli which lead
to their display. This is a very difficult hypothesis. It seems to me
that if, as a matter of method rather than metaphysics, we desire to
obtain as much independence for psychology as is practically feasible,
we shall do better to accept mnemic causation in psychology protem,
and therefore reject parallelism, since there is no good ground for
admitting mnemic causation in physics.

It is perhaps worth while to observe that mnemic causation is what led
Bergson to deny that there is causation at all in the psychical sphere.
He points out, very truly, that the same stimulus, repeated, does not
have the same consequences, and he argues that this is contrary to the
maxim, "same cause, same effect." It is only necessary, however, to take
account of past occurrences and include them with the cause, in order
to re-establish the maxim, and the possibility of psychological causal
laws. The metaphysical conception of a cause lingers in our manner of
viewing causal laws: we want to be able to FEEL a connection between
cause and effect, and to be able to imagine the cause as "operating."
This makes us unwilling to regard causal laws as MERELY observed
uniformities of sequence; yet that is all that science has to offer.
To ask why such-and-such a kind of sequence occurs is either to ask a
meaningless question, or to demand some more general kind of sequence
which includes the one in question. The widest empirical laws of
sequence known at any time can only be "explained" in the sense of being
subsumed by later discoveries under wider laws; but these wider laws,
until they in turn are subsumed, will remain brute facts, resting solely
upon observation, not upon some supposed inherent rationality.

There is therefore no a priori objection to a causal law in which part
of the cause has ceased to exist. To argue against such a law on the
ground that what is past cannot operate now, is to introduce the old
metaphysical notion of cause, for which science can find no place. The
only reason that could be validly alleged against mnemic causation would
be that, in fact, all the phenomena can be explained without it. They
are explained without it by Semon's "engram," or by any theory which
regards the results of experience as embodied in modifications of
the brain and nerves. But they are not explained, unless with extreme
artificiality, by any theory which regards the latent effects of
experience as psychical rather than physical. Those who desire to make
psychology as far as possible independent of physiology would do well,
it seems to me, if they adopted mnemic causation. For my part, however,
I have no such desire, and I shall therefore endeavour to state the
grounds which occur to me in favour of some such view as that of the
"engram."

One of the first points to be urged is that mnemic phenomena are just
as much to be found in physiology as in psychology. They are even to
be found in plants, as Sir Francis Darwin pointed out (cf. Semon, "Die
Mneme," 2nd edition, p. 28 n.). Habit is a characteristic of the body
at least as much as of the mind. We should, therefore, be compelled
to allow the intrusion of mnemic causation, if admitted at all, into
non-psychological regions, which ought, one feels, to be subject only to
causation of the ordinary physical sort. The fact is that a great deal
of what, at first sight, distinguishes psychology from physics is found,
on examination, to be common to psychology and physiology; this whole
question of the influence of experience is a case in point. Now it
is possible, of course, to take the view advocated by Professor J. S.
Haldane, who contends that physiology is not theoretically reducible to
physics and chemistry.* But the weight of opinion among physiologists
appears to be against him on this point; and we ought certainly to
require very strong evidence before admitting any such breach of
continuity as between living and dead matter. The argument from the
existence of mnemic phenomena in physiology must therefore be allowed a
certain weight against the hypothesis that mnemic causation is ultimate.

     * See his "The New Physiology and Other Addresses," Griffin,
     1919, also the symposium, "Are Physical, Biological and
     Psychological Categories Irreducible?" in "Life and Finite
     Individuality," edited for the Aristotelian Society, with an
     Introduction. By H. Wildon Carr, Williams & Norgate, 1918.

The argument from the connection of brain-lesions with loss of memory is
not so strong as it looks, though it has also, some weight. What we
know is that memory, and mnemic phenomena generally, can be disturbed or
destroyed by changes in the brain. This certainly proves that the brain
plays an essential part in the causation of memory, but does not prove
that a certain state of the brain is, by itself, a sufficient condition
for the existence of memory. Yet it is this last that has to be proved.
The theory of the engram, or any similar theory, has to maintain that,
given a body and brain in a suitable state, a man will have a certain
memory, without the need of any further conditions. What is known,
however, is only that he will not have memories if his body and brain
are not in a suitable state. That is to say, the appropriate state
of body and brain is proved to be necessary for memory, but not to be
sufficient. So far, therefore, as our definite knowledge goes, memory
may require for its causation a past occurrence as well as a certain
present state of the brain.

In order to prove conclusively that mnemic phenomena arise whenever
certain physiological conditions are fulfilled, we ought to be able
actually to see differences between the brain of a man who speaks
English and that of a man who speaks French, between the brain of a man
who has seen New York and can recall it, and that of a man who has never
seen that city. It may be that the time will come when this will be
possible, but at present we are very far removed from it. At present,
there is, so far as I am aware, no good evidence that every difference
between the knowledge possessed by A and that possessed by B is
paralleled by some difference in their brains. We may believe that
this is the case, but if we do, our belief is based upon analogies
and general scientific maxims, not upon any foundation of detailed
observation. I am myself inclined, as a working hypothesis, to adopt
the belief in question, and to hold that past experience only affects
present behaviour through modifications of physiological structure. But
the evidence seems not quite conclusive, so that I do not think we ought
to forget the other hypothesis, or to reject entirely the possibility
that mnemic causation may be the ultimate explanation of mnemic
phenomena. I say this, not because I think it LIKELY that mnemic
causation is ultimate, but merely because I think it POSSIBLE, and
because it often turns out important to the progress of science to
remember hypotheses which have previously seemed improbable.




LECTURE V. PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL CAUSAL LAWS

The traditional conception of cause and effect is one which modern
science shows to be fundamentally erroneous, and requiring to be
replaced by a quite different notion, that of LAWS OF CHANGE. In the
traditional conception, a particular event A caused a particular event
B, and by this it was implied that, given any event B, some earlier
event A could be discovered which had a relation to it, such that--

(1) Whenever A occurred, it was followed by B;

(2) In this sequence, there was something "necessary," not a mere de
facto occurrence of A first and then B.

The second point is illustrated by the old discussion as to whether
it can be said that day causes night, on the ground that day is always
followed by night. The orthodox answer was that day could not be called
the cause of night, because it would not be followed by night if the
earth's rotation were to cease, or rather to grow so slow that one
complete rotation would take a year. A cause, it was held, must be such
that under no conceivable circumstances could it fail to be followed by
its effect.

As a matter of fact, such sequences as were sought by believers in the
traditional form of causation have not so far been found in nature.
Everything in nature is apparently in a state of continuous change,* so
that what we call one "event" turns out to be really a process. If this
event is to cause another event, the two will have to be contiguous in
time; for if there is any interval between them, something may happen
during that interval to prevent the expected effect. Cause and effect,
therefore, will have to be temporally contiguous processes. It is
difficult to believe, at any rate where physical laws are concerned,
that the earlier part of the process which is the cause can make any
difference to the effect, so long as the later part of the process which
is the cause remains unchanged. Suppose, for example, that a man dies
of arsenic poisoning, we say that his taking arsenic was the cause
of death. But clearly the process by which he acquired the arsenic
is irrelevant: everything that happened before he swallowed it may be
ignored, since it cannot alter the effect except in so far as it alters
his condition at the moment of taking the dose. But we may go further:
swallowing arsenic is not really the proximate cause of death, since a
man might be shot through the head immediately after taking the dose,
and then it would not be of arsenic that he would die. The arsenic
produces certain physiological changes, which take a finite time before
they end in death. The earlier parts of these changes can be ruled out
in the same way as we can rule out the process by which the arsenic was
acquired. Proceeding in this way, we can shorten the process which we
are calling the cause more and more. Similarly we shall have to shorten
the effect. It may happen that immediately after the man's death his
body is blown to pieces by a bomb. We cannot say what will happen after
the man's death, through merely knowing that he has died as the result
of arsenic poisoning. Thus, if we are to take the cause as one event and
the effect as another, both must be shortened indefinitely. The result
is that we merely have, as the embodiment of our causal law, a certain
direction of change at each moment. Hence we are brought to differential
equations as embodying causal laws. A physical law does not say "A will
be followed by B," but tells us what acceleration a particle will have
under given circumstances, i.e. it tells us how the particle's motion is
changing at each moment, not where the particle will be at some future
moment.

     * The theory of quanta suggests that the continuity is only
     apparent. If so, we shall be able theoretically to reach
     events which are not processes. But in what is directly
     observable there is still apparent continuity, which
     justifies the above remarks for the prevent.

Laws embodied in differential equations may possibly be exact,
but cannot be known to be so. All that we can know empirically is
approximate and liable to exceptions; the exact laws that are assumed in
physics are known to be somewhere near the truth, but are not known to
be true just as they stand. The laws that we actually know empirically
have the form of the traditional causal laws, except that they are not
to be regarded as universal or necessary. "Taking arsenic is followed by
death" is a good empirical generalization; it may have exceptions, but
they will be rare. As against the professedly exact laws of physics,
such empirical generalizations have the advantage that they deal with
observable phenomena. We cannot observe infinitesimals, whether in time
or space; we do not even know whether time and space are infinitely
divisible. Therefore rough empirical generalizations have a definite
place in science, in spite of not being exact of universal. They are the
data for more exact laws, and the grounds for believing that they are
USUALLY true are stronger than the grounds for believing that the more
exact laws are ALWAYS true.

Science starts, therefore, from generalizations of the form, "A is
usually followed by B." This is the nearest approach that can be made
to a causal law of the traditional sort. It may happen in any particular
instance that A is ALWAYS followed by B, but we cannot know this, since
we cannot foresee all the perfectly possible circumstances that might
make the sequence fail, or know that none of them will actually occur.
If, however, we know of a very large number of cases in which A is
followed by B, and few or none in which the sequence fails, we shall in
PRACTICE be justified in saying "A causes B," provided we do not attach
to the notion of cause any of the metaphysical superstitions that have
gathered about the word.

There is another point, besides lack of universality and necessity,
which it is important to realize as regards causes in the above sense,
and that is the lack of uniqueness. It is generally assumed that, given
any event, there is some one phenomenon which is THE cause of the event
in question. This seems to be a mere mistake. Cause, in the only
sense in which it can be practically applied, means "nearly invariable
antecedent." We cannot in practice obtain an antecedent which is QUITE
invariable, for this would require us to take account of the whole
universe, since something not taken account of may prevent the expected
effect. We cannot distinguish, among nearly invariable antecedents, one
as THE cause, and the others as merely its concomitants: the attempt to
do this depends upon a notion of cause which is derived from will, and
will (as we shall see later) is not at all the sort of thing that it is
generally supposed to be, nor is there any reason to think that in the
physical world there is anything even remotely analogous to what will is
supposed to be. If we could find one antecedent, and only one, that was
QUITE invariable, we could call that one THE cause without introducing
any notion derived from mistaken ideas about will. But in fact we cannot
find any antecedent that we know to be quite invariable, and we can find
many that are nearly so. For example, men leave a factory for dinner
when the hooter sounds at twelve o'clock. You may say the hooter is
THE cause of their leaving. But innumerable other hooters in other
factories, which also always sound at twelve o'clock, have just as
good a right to be called the cause. Thus every event has many nearly
invariable antecedents, and therefore many antecedents which may be
called its cause.

The laws of traditional physics, in the form in which they deal with
movements of matter or electricity, have an apparent simplicity which
somewhat conceals the empirical character of what they assert. A piece
of matter, as it is known empirically, is not a single existing thing,
but a system of existing things. When several people simultaneously see
the same table, they all see something different; therefore "the" table,
which they are supposed all to see, must be either a hypothesis or
a construction. "The" table is to be neutral as between different
observers: it does not favour the aspect seen by one man at the expense
of that seen by another. It was natural, though to my mind mistaken, to
regard the "real" table as the common cause of all the appearances which
the table presents (as we say) to different observers. But why should we
suppose that there is some one common cause of all these appearances? As
we have just seen, the notion of "cause" is not so reliable as to allow
us to infer the existence of something that, by its very nature, can
never be observed.

Instead of looking for an impartial source, we can secure neutrality by
the equal representation of all parties. Instead of supposing that there
is some unknown cause, the "real" table, behind the different sensations
of those who are said to be looking at the table, we may take the
whole set of these sensations (together possibly with certain other
particulars) as actually BEING the table. That is to say, the table
which is neutral as between different observers (actual and possible)
is the set of all those particulars which would naturally be called
"aspects" of the table from different points of view. (This is a first
approximation, modified later.)

It may be said: If there is no single existent which is the source of
all these "aspects," how are they collected together? The answer is
simple: Just as they would be if there were such a single existent. The
supposed "real" table underlying its appearances is, in any case, not
itself perceived, but inferred, and the question whether such-and-such
a particular is an "aspect" of this table is only to be settled by
the connection of the particular in question with the one or more
particulars by which the table is defined. That is to say, even if we
assume a "real" table, the particulars which are its aspects have to be
collected together by their relations to each other, not to it, since
it is merely inferred from them. We have only, therefore, to notice how
they are collected together, and we can then keep the collection
without assuming any "real" table as distinct from the collection. When
different people see what they call the same table, they see things
which are not exactly the same, owing to difference of point of view,
but which are sufficiently alike to be described in the same words, so
long as no great accuracy or minuteness is sought. These closely similar
particulars are collected together by their similarity primarily
and, more correctly, by the fact that they are related to each other
approximately according to the laws of perspective and of reflection and
diffraction of light. I suggest, as a first approximation, that these
particulars, together with such correlated others as are unperceived,
jointly ARE the table; and that a similar definition applies to all
physical objects.*

     *See "Our Knowledge of the External World" (Allen & Unwin),
     chaps. iii and iv.

In order to eliminate the reference to our perceptions, which introduces
an irrelevant psychological suggestion, I will take a different
illustration, namely, stellar photography. A photographic plate exposed
on a clear night reproduces the appearance of the portion of the sky
concerned, with more or fewer stars according to the power of the
telescope that is being used. Each separate star which is photographed
produces its separate effect on the plate, just as it would upon
ourselves if we were looking at the sky. If we assume, as science
normally does, the continuity of physical processes, we are forced
to conclude that, at the place where the plate is, and at all places
between it and a star which it photographs, SOMETHING is happening which
is specially connected with that star. In the days when the aether was
less in doubt, we should have said that what was happening was a certain
kind of transverse vibration in the aether. But it is not necessary
or desirable to be so explicit: all that we need say is that SOMETHING
happens which is specially connected with the star in question. It
must be something specially connected with that star, since that star
produces its own special effect upon the plate. Whatever it is must be
the end of a process which starts from the star and radiates outwards,
partly on general grounds of continuity, partly to account for the fact
that light is transmitted with a certain definite velocity. We thus
arrive at the conclusion that, if a certain star is visible at a certain
place, or could be photographed by a sufficiently sensitive plate at
that place, something is happening there which is specially connected
with that star. Therefore in every place at all times a vast multitude
of things must be happening, namely, at least one for every physical
object which can be seen or photographed from that place. We can
classify such happenings on either of two principles:

(1) We can collect together all the happenings in one place, as is done
by photography so far as light is concerned;

(2) We can collect together all the happenings, in different places,
which are connected in the way that common sense regards as being due to
their emanating from one object.

Thus, to return to the stars, we can collect together either--

(1) All the appearances of different stars in a given place, or,

(2) All the appearances of a given star in different places.

But when I speak of "appearances," I do so only for brevity: I do not
mean anything that must "appear" to somebody, but only that happening,
whatever it may be, which is connected, at the place in question, with a
given physical object--according to the old orthodox theory, it would be
a transverse vibration in the aether. Like the different appearances
of the table to a number of simultaneous observers, the different
particulars that belong to one physical object are to be collected
together by continuity and inherent laws of correlation, not by their
supposed causal connection with an unknown assumed existent called a
piece of matter, which would be a mere unnecessary metaphysical thing in
itself. A piece of matter, according to the definition that I propose,
is, as a first approximation,* the collection of all those correlated
particulars which would normally be regarded as its appearances or
effects in different places. Some further elaborations are desirable,
but we can ignore them for the present. I shall return to them at the
end of this lecture.

     *The exact definition of a piece of matter as a construction
     will be given later.

According to the view that I am suggesting, a physical object or piece
of matter is the collection of all those correlated particulars which
would be regarded by common sense as its effects or appearances in
different places. On the other hand, all the happenings in a given place
represent what common sense would regard as the appearances of a number
of different objects as viewed from that place. All the happenings in
one place may be regarded as the view of the world from that place. I
shall call the view of the world from a given place a "perspective." A
photograph represents a perspective. On the other hand, if photographs
of the stars were taken in all points throughout space, and in all such
photographs a certain star, say Sirius, were picked out whenever it
appeared, all the different appearances of Sirius, taken together,
would represent Sirius. For the understanding of the difference between
psychology and physics it is vital to understand these two ways of
classifying particulars, namely:

(1) According to the place where they occur;

(2) According to the system of correlated particulars in different
places to which they belong, such system being defined as a physical
object.

Given a system of particulars which is a physical object, I shall
define that one of the system which is in a given place (if any) as the
"appearance of that object in that place."

When the appearance of an object in a given place changes, it is found
that one or other of two things occurs. The two possibilities may be
illustrated by an example. You are in a room with a man, whom you see:
you may cease to see him either by shutting your eyes or by his going
out of the room. In the first case, his appearance to other people
remains unchanged; in the second, his appearance changes from all
places. In the first case, you say that it is not he who has changed,
but your eyes; in the second, you say that he has changed. Generalizing,
we distinguish--

(1) Cases in which only certain appearances of the object change, while
others, and especially appearances from places very near to the object,
do not change;

(2) Cases where all, or almost all, the appearances of the object
undergo a connected change.

In the first case, the change is attributed to the medium between the
object and the place; in the second, it is attributed to the object
itself.*

     * The application of this distinction to motion raises
     complications due to relativity, but we may ignore these for
     our present purposes.

It is the frequency of the latter kind of change, and the comparatively
simple nature of the laws governing the simultaneous alterations
of appearances in such cases, that have made it possible to treat a
physical object as one thing, and to overlook the fact that it is a
system of particulars. When a number of people at a theatre watch an
actor, the changes in their several perspectives are so similar and so
closely correlated that all are popularly regarded as identical with
each other and with the changes of the actor himself. So long as all
the changes in the appearances of a body are thus correlated there is no
pressing prima facie need to break up the system of appearances, or to
realize that the body in question is not really one thing but a set of
correlated particulars. It is especially and primarily such changes that
physics deals with, i.e. it deals primarily with processes in which
the unity of a physical object need not be broken up because all its
appearances change simultaneously according to the same law--or, if not
all, at any rate all from places sufficiently near to the object, with
in creasing accuracy as we approach the object.

The changes in appearances of an object which are due to changes in the
intervening medium will not affect, or will affect only very slightly,
the appearances from places close to the object. If the appearances
from sufficiently neighbouring places are either wholly un changed,
or changed to a diminishing extent which has zero for its limit, it
is usually found that the changes can be accounted for by changes in
objects which are between the object in question and the places from
which its appearance has changed appreciably. Thus physics is able
to reduce the laws of most changes with which it deals to changes in
physical objects, and to state most of its fundamental laws in terms of
matter. It is only in those cases in which the unity of the system of
appearances constituting a piece of matter has to be broken up, that the
statement of what is happening cannot be made exclusively in terms of
matter. The whole of psychology, we shall find, is included among such
cases; hence their importance for our purposes.

We can now begin to understand one of the fundamental differences
between physics and psychology. Physics treats as a unit the whole
system of appearances of a piece of matter, whereas psychology is
interested in certain of these appearances themselves. Confining
ourselves for the moment to the psychology of perceptions, we observe
that perceptions are certain of the appearances of physical objects.
From the point of view that we have been hitherto adopting, we
might define them as the appearances of objects at places from which
sense-organs and the suitable parts of the nervous system form part
of the intervening medium. Just as a photographic plate receives a
different impression of a cluster of stars when a telescope is part of
the intervening medium, so a brain receives a different impression
when an eye and an optic nerve are part of the intervening medium.
An impression due to this sort of intervening medium is called a
perception, and is interesting to psychology on its own account, not
merely as one of the set of correlated particulars which is the physical
object of which (as we say) we are having a perception.

We spoke earlier of two ways of classifying particulars. One way
collects together the appearances commonly regarded as a given object
from different places; this is, broadly speaking, the way of physics,
leading to the construction of physical objects as sets of such
appearances. The other way collects together the appearances of
different objects from a given place, the result being what we call a
perspective. In the particular case where the place concerned is a
human brain, the perspective belonging to the place consists of all the
perceptions of a certain man at a given time. Thus classification by
perspectives is relevant to psychology, and is essential in defining
what we mean by one mind.

I do not wish to suggest that the way in which I have been defining
perceptions is the only possible way, or even the best way. It is the
way that arose naturally out of our present topic. But when we approach
psychology from a more introspective standpoint, we have to distinguish
sensations and perceptions, if possible, from other mental occurrences,
if any. We have also to consider the psychological effects of
sensations, as opposed to their physical causes and correlates. These
problems are quite distinct from those with which we have been concerned
in the present lecture, and I shall not deal with them until a later
stage.

It is clear that psychology is concerned essentially with actual
particulars, not merely with systems of particulars. In this it differs
from physics, which, broadly speaking, is concerned with the cases
in which all the particulars which make up one physical object can be
treated as a single causal unit, or rather the particulars which are
sufficiently near to the object of which they are appearances can be so
treated. The laws which physics seeks can, broadly speaking, be stated
by treating such systems of particulars as causal units. The laws which
psychology seeks cannot be so stated, since the particulars themselves
are what interests the psychologist. This is one of the fundamental
differences between physics and psychology; and to make it clear has
been the main purpose of this lecture.

I will conclude with an attempt to give a more precise definition of
a piece of matter. The appearances of a piece of matter from different
places change partly according to intrinsic laws (the laws of
perspective, in the case of visual shape), partly according to the
nature of the intervening medium--fog, blue spectacles, telescopes,
microscopes, sense-organs, etc. As we approach nearer to the object, the
effect of the intervening medium grows less. In a generalized sense,
all the intrinsic laws of change of appearance may be called "laws
of perspective." Given any appearance of an object, we can construct
hypothetically a certain system of appearances to which the appearance
in question would belong if the laws of perspective alone were
concerned. If we construct this hypothetical system for each appearance
of the object in turn, the system corresponding to a given appearance
x will be independent of any distortion due to the medium beyond x, and
will only embody such distortion as is due to the medium between x and
the object. Thus, as the appearance by which our hypothetical system
is defined is moved nearer and nearer to the object, the hypothetical
system of appearances defined by its means embodies less and less of the
effect of the medium. The different sets of appearances resulting from
moving x nearer and nearer to the object will approach to a limiting
set, and this limiting set will be that system of appearances which the
object would present if the laws of perspective alone were operative
and the medium exercised no distorting effect. This limiting set of
appearances may be defined, for purposes of physics, as the piece of
matter concerned.




LECTURE VI. INTROSPECTION

One of the main purposes of these lectures is to give grounds for
the belief that the distinction between mind and matter is not so
fundamental as is commonly supposed. In the preceding lecture I dealt in
outline with the physical side of this problem. I attempted to show
that what we call a material object is not itself a substance, but is
a system of particulars analogous in their nature to sensations, and in
fact often including actual sensations among their number. In this
way the stuff of which physical objects are composed is brought into
relation with the stuff of which part, at least, of our mental life is
composed.

There is, however, a converse task which is equally necessary for our
thesis, and that is, to show that the stuff of our mental life is devoid
of many qualities which it is commonly supposed to have, and is not
possessed of any attributes which make it incapable of forming part of
the world of matter. In the present lecture I shall begin the arguments
for this view.

Corresponding to the supposed duality of matter and mind, there are, in
orthodox psychology, two ways of knowing what exists. One of these, the
way of sensation and external perception, is supposed to furnish data
for our knowledge of matter, the other, called "introspection," is
supposed to furnish data for knowledge of our mental processes. To
common sense, this distinction seems clear and easy. When you see a
friend coming along the street, you acquire knowledge of an external,
physical fact; when you realize that you are glad to meet him, you
acquire knowledge of a mental fact. Your dreams and memories and
thoughts, of which you are often conscious, are mental facts, and the
process by which you become aware of them SEEMS to be different from
sensation. Kant calls it the "inner sense"; sometimes it is spoken of
as "consciousness of self"; but its commonest name in modern English
psychology is "introspection." It is this supposed method of acquiring
knowledge of our mental processes that I wish to analyse and examine in
this lecture.

I will state at the outset the view which I shall aim at establishing.
I believe that the stuff of our mental life, as opposed to its relations
and structure, consists wholly of sensations and images. Sensations are
connected with matter in the way that I tried to explain in Lecture V,
i.e. each is a member of a system which is a certain physical object.
Images, though they USUALLY have certain characteristics, especially
lack of vividness, that distinguish them from sensations, are not
INVARIABLY so distinguished, and cannot therefore be defined by these
characteristics. Images, as opposed to sensations, can only be defined
by their different causation: they are caused by association with a
sensation, not by a stimulus external to the nervous system--or perhaps
one should say external to the brain, where the higher animals are
concerned. The occurrence of a sensation or image does not in itself
constitute knowledge but any sensation or image may come to be known
if the conditions are suitable. When a sensation--like the hearing of a
clap of thunder--is normally correlated with closely similar sensations
in our neighbours, we regard it as giving knowledge of the external
world, since we regard the whole set of similar sensations as due to
a common external cause. But images and bodily sensations are not so
correlated. Bodily sensations can be brought into a correlation by
physiology, and thus take their place ultimately among sources of
knowledge of the physical world. But images cannot be made to fit in
with the simultaneous sensations and images of others. Apart from their
hypothetical causes in the brain, they have a causal connection
with physical objects, through the fact that they are copies of past
sensations; but the physical objects with which they are thus connected
are in the past, not in the present. These images remain private in
a sense in which sensations are not. A sensation SEEMS to give us
knowledge of a present physical object, while an image does not, except
when it amounts to a hallucination, and in this case the seeming is
deceptive. Thus the whole context of the two occurrences is different.
But in themselves they do not differ profoundly, and there is no reason
to invoke two different ways of knowing for the one and for the other.
Consequently introspection as a separate kind of knowledge disappears.

The criticism of introspection has been in the main the work of American
psychologists. I will begin by summarizing an article which seems to me
to afford a good specimen of their arguments, namely, "The Case against
Introspection," by Knight Dunlap ("Psychological Review," vol xix, No.
5, pp. 404-413, September, 1912). After a few historical quotations,
he comes to two modern defenders of introspection, Stout and James. He
quotes from Stout such statements as the following: "Psychical states as
such become objects only when we attend to them in an introspective way.
Otherwise they are not themselves objects, but only constituents of the
process by which objects are recognized" ("Manual," 2nd edition, p. 134.
The word "recognized" in Dunlap's quotation should be "cognized.") "The
object itself can never be identified with the present modification of
the individual's consciousness by which it is cognized" (ib. p. 60).
This is to be true even when we are thinking about modifications of
our own consciousness; such modifications are to be always at least
partially distinct from the conscious experience in which we think of
them.

At this point I wish to interrupt the account of Knight Dunlap's article
in order to make some observations on my own account with reference to
the above quotations from Stout. In the first place, the conception of
"psychical states" seems to me one which demands analysis of a somewhat
destructive character. This analysis I shall give in later lectures as
regards cognition; I have already given it as regards desire. In the
second place, the conception of "objects" depends upon a certain view
as to cognition which I believe to be wholly mistaken, namely, the view
which I discussed in my first lecture in connection with Brentano.
In this view a single cognitive occurrence contains both content and
object, the content being essentially mental, while the object is
physical except in introspection and abstract thought. I have already
criticized this view, and will not dwell upon it now, beyond saying
that "the process by which objects are cognized" appears to be a very
slippery phrase. When we "see a table," as common sense would say, the
table as a physical object is not the "object" (in the psychological
sense) of our perception. Our perception is made up of sensations,
images and beliefs, but the supposed "object" is something inferential,
externally related, not logically bound up with what is occurring in us.
This question of the nature of the object also affects the view we take
of self-consciousness. Obviously, a "conscious experience" is different
from a physical object; therefore it is natural to assume that a thought
or perception whose object is a conscious experience must be different
from a thought or perception whose object is a physical object. But if
the relation to the object is inferential and external, as I maintain,
the difference between two thoughts may bear very little relation to
the difference between their objects. And to speak of "the present
modification of the individual's consciousness by which an object is
cognized" is to suggest that the cognition of objects is a far more
direct process, far more intimately bound up with the objects, than I
believe it to be. All these points will be amplified when we come to the
analysis of knowledge, but it is necessary briefly to state them now in
order to suggest the atmosphere in which our analysis of "introspection"
is to be carried on.

Another point in which Stout's remarks seem to me to suggest what I
regard as mistakes is his use of "consciousness." There is a view which
is prevalent among psychologists, to the effect that one can speak of "a
conscious experience" in a curious dual sense, meaning, on the one hand,
an experience which is conscious of something, and, on the other hand,
an experience which has some intrinsic nature characteristic of what
is called "consciousness." That is to say, a "conscious experience" is
characterized on the one hand by relation to its object and on the
other hand by being composed of a certain peculiar stuff, the stuff of
"consciousness." And in many authors there is yet a third confusion: a
"conscious experience," in this third sense, is an experience of
which we are conscious. All these, it seems to me, need to be clearly
separated. To say that one occurrence is "conscious" of another is, to
my mind, to assert an external and rather remote relation between them.
I might illustrate it by the relation of uncle and nephew a man becomes
an uncle through no effort of his own, merely through an occurrence
elsewhere. Similarly, when you are said to be "conscious" of a table,
the question whether this is really the case cannot be decided by
examining only your state of mind: it is necessary also to ascertain
whether your sensation is having those correlates which past experience
causes you to assume, or whether the table happens, in this case, to be
a mirage. And, as I explained in my first lecture, I do not believe that
there is any "stuff" of consciousness, so that there is no intrinsic
character by which a "conscious" experience could be distinguished from
any other.

After these preliminaries, we can return to Knight Dunlap's article.
His criticism of Stout turns on the difficulty of giving any empirical
meaning to such notions as the "mind" or the "subject"; he quotes from
Stout the sentence: "The most important drawback is that the mind, in
watching its own workings, must necessarily have its attention divided
between two objects," and he concludes: "Without question, Stout is
bringing in here illicitly the concept of a single observer, and his
introspection does not provide for the observation of this observer;
for the process observed and the observer are distinct" (p. 407).
The objections to any theory which brings in the single observer were
considered in Lecture I, and were acknowledged to be cogent. In so
far, therefore, as Stout's theory of introspection rests upon this
assumption, we are compelled to reject it. But it is perfectly possible
to believe in introspection without supposing that there is a single
observer.

William James's theory of introspection, which Dunlap next examines,
does not assume a single observer. It changed after the publication
of his "Psychology," in consequence of his abandoning the dualism of
thought and things. Dunlap summarizes his theory as follows:

"The essential points in James's scheme of consciousness are SUBJECT,
OBJECT, and a KNOWING of the object by the subject. The difference
between James's scheme and other schemes involving the same terms is
that James considers subject and object to be the same thing, but at
different times In order to satisfy this requirement James supposes a
realm of existence which he at first called 'states of consciousness' or
'thoughts,' and later, 'pure experience,' the latter term including both
the 'thoughts' and the 'knowing.' This scheme, with all its magnificent
artificiality, James held on to until the end, simply dropping the
term consciousness and the dualism between the thought and an external
reality"(p. 409).

He adds: "All that James's system really amounts to is the
acknowledgment that a succession of things are known, and that they are
known by something. This is all any one can claim, except for the
fact that the things are known together, and that the knower for the
different items is one and the same" (ib.).

In this statement, to my mind, Dunlap concedes far more than James did
in his later theory. I see no reason to suppose that "the knower for
different items is one and the same," and I am convinced that this
proposition could not possibly be ascertained except by introspection of
the sort that Dunlap rejects. The first of these points must wait until
we come to the analysis of belief: the second must be considered now.
Dunlap's view is that there is a dualism of subject and object, but that
the subject can never become object, and therefore there is no awareness
of an awareness. He says in discussing the view that introspection
reveals the occurrence of knowledge: "There can be no denial of the
existence of the thing (knowing) which is alleged to be known or
observed in this sort of 'introspection.' The allegation that the
knowing is observed is that which may be denied. Knowing there certainly
is; known, the knowing certainly is not"(p. 410). And again: "I am
never aware of an awareness" (ib.). And on the next page: "It may sound
paradoxical to say that one cannot observe the process (or relation) of
observation, and yet may be certain that there is such a process: but
there is really no inconsistency in the saying. How do I know that there
is awareness? By being aware of something. There is no meaning in the
term 'awareness' which is not expressed in the statement 'I am aware of
a colour (or what-not).'"

But the paradox cannot be so lightly disposed of. The statement "I am
aware of a colour" is assumed by Knight Dunlap to be known to be true,
but he does not explain how it comes to be known. The argument against
him is not conclusive, since he may be able to show some valid way of
inferring our awareness. But he does not suggest any such way. There is
nothing odd in the hypothesis of beings which are aware of objects, but
not of their own awareness; it is, indeed, highly probable that young
children and the higher animals are such beings. But such beings cannot
make the statement "I am aware of a colour," which WE can make. We have,
therefore, some knowledge which they lack. It is necessary to Knight
Dunlap's position to maintain that this additional knowledge is purely
inferential, but he makes no attempt to show how the inference is
possible. It may, of course, be possible, but I cannot see how. To my
mind the fact (which he admits) that we know there is awareness, is ALL
BUT decisive against his theory, and in favour of the view that we can
be aware of an awareness.

Dunlap asserts (to return to James) that the real ground for James's
original belief in introspection was his belief in two sorts of
objects, namely, thoughts and things. He suggests that it was a
mere inconsistency on James's part to adhere to introspection after
abandoning the dualism of thoughts and things. I do not wholly agree
with this view, but it is difficult to disentangle the difference as to
introspection from the difference as to the nature of knowing. Dunlap
suggests (p. 411) that what is called introspection really consists of
awareness of "images," visceral sensations, and so on. This view, in
essence, seems to me sound. But then I hold that knowing itself consists
of such constituents suitably related, and that in being aware of them
we are sometimes being aware of instances of knowing. For this reason,
much as I agree with his view as to what are the objects of which
there is awareness, I cannot wholly agree with his conclusion as to the
impossibility of introspection.

The behaviourists have challenged introspection even more vigorously
than Knight Dunlap, and have gone so far as to deny the existence of
images. But I think that they have confused various things which
are very commonly confused, and that it is necessary to make several
distinctions before we can arrive at what is true and what false in the
criticism of introspection.

I wish to distinguish three distinct questions, any one of which may be
meant when we ask whether introspection is a source of knowledge. The
three questions are as follows:

(1) Can we observe anything about ourselves which we cannot observe
about other people, or is everything we can observe PUBLIC, in the sense
that another could also observe it if suitably placed?

(2) Does everything that we can observe obey the laws of physics and
form part of the physical world, or can we observe certain things that
lie outside physics?

(3) Can we observe anything which differs in its intrinsic nature from
the constituents of the physical world, or is everything that we can
observe composed of elements intrinsically similar to the constituents
of what is called matter?

Any one of these three questions may be used to define introspection. I
should favour introspection in the sense of the first question, i.e. I
think that some of the things we observe cannot, even theoretically, be
observed by any one else. The second question, tentatively and for
the present, I should answer in favour of introspection; I think that
images, in the actual condition of science, cannot be brought under the
causal laws of physics, though perhaps ultimately they may be. The
third question I should answer adversely to introspection I think that
observation shows us nothing that is not composed of sensations and
images, and that images differ from sensations in their causal laws, not
intrinsically. I shall deal with the three questions successively.

(1) PUBLICITY OR PRIVACY OF WHAT IS OBSERVED. Confining ourselves, for
the moment, to sensations, we find that there are different degrees
of publicity attaching to different sorts of sensations. If you feel a
toothache when the other people in the room do not, you are in no way
surprised; but if you hear a clap of thunder when they do not, you begin
to be alarmed as to your mental condition. Sight and hearing are the
most public of the senses; smell only a trifle less so; touch, again, a
trifle less, since two people can only touch the same spot successively,
not simultaneously. Taste has a sort of semi-publicity, since people
seem to experience similar taste-sensations when they eat similar foods;
but the publicity is incomplete, since two people cannot eat actually
the same piece of food.

But when we pass on to bodily sensations--headache, toothache, hunger,
thirst, the feeling of fatigue, and so on--we get quite away from
publicity, into a region where other people can tell us what they feel,
but we cannot directly observe their feeling. As a natural result of
this state of affairs, it has come to be thought that the public senses
give us knowledge of the outer world, while the private senses only give
us knowledge as to our own bodies. As regards privacy, all images, of
whatever sort, belong with the sensations which only give knowledge of
our own bodies, i.e. each is only observable by one observer. This is
the reason why images of sight and hearing are more obviously different
from sensations of sight and hearing than images of bodily sensations
are from bodily sensations; and that is why the argument in favour of
images is more conclusive in such cases as sight and hearing than in
such cases as inner speech.

The whole distinction of privacy and publicity, however, so long as we
confine ourselves to sensations, is one of degree, not of kind. No
two people, there is good empirical reason to think, ever have exactly
similar sensations related to the same physical object at the same
moment; on the other hand, even the most private sensation has
correlations which would theoretically enable another observer to infer
it.

That no sensation is ever completely public, results from differences of
point of view. Two people looking at the same table do not get the same
sensation, because of perspective and the way the light falls. They get
only correlated sensations. Two people listening to the same sound do
not hear exactly the same thing, because one is nearer to the source of
the sound than the other, one has better hearing than the other, and
so on. Thus publicity in sensations consists, not in having PRECISELY
similar sensations, but in having more or less similar sensations
correlated according to ascertainable laws. The sensations which strike
us as public are those where the correlated sensations are very similar
and the correlations are very easy to discover. But even the most
private sensations have correlations with things that others can
observe. The dentist does not observe your ache, but he can see the
cavity which causes it, and could guess that you are suffering even
if you did not tell him. This fact, however, cannot be used, as Watson
would apparently wish, to extrude from science observations which are
private to one observer, since it is by means of many such observations
that correlations are established, e.g. between toothaches and cavities.
Privacy, therefore does not by itself make a datum unamenable to
scientific treatment. On this point, the argument against introspection
must be rejected.

(2) DOES EVERYTHING OBSERVABLE OBEY THE LAWS OF PHYSICS? We come now to
the second ground of objection to introspection, namely, that its data
do not obey the laws of physics. This, though less emphasized, is,
I think, an objection which is really more strongly felt than the
objection of privacy. And we obtain a definition of introspection more
in harmony with usage if we define it as observation of data not subject
to physical laws than if we define it by means of privacy. No one would
regard a man as introspective because he was conscious of having a
stomach ache. Opponents of introspection do not mean to deny the obvious
fact that we can observe bodily sensations which others cannot observe.
For example, Knight Dunlap contends that images are really muscular
contractions,* and evidently regards our awareness of muscular
contractions as not coming under the head of introspection. I think it
will be found that the essential characteristic of introspective data,
in the sense which now concerns us, has to do with LOCALIZATION: either
they are not localized at all, or they are localized, like visual
images, in a place already physically occupied by something which would
be inconsistent with them if they were regarded as part of the physical
world. If you have a visual image of your friend sitting in a chair
which in fact is empty, you cannot locate the image in your body,
because it is visual, nor (as a physical phenomenon) in the chair,
because the chair, as a physical object, is empty. Thus it seems to
follow that the physical world does not include all that we are aware
of, and that images, which are introspective data, have to be regarded,
for the present, as not obeying the laws of physics; this is, I think,
one of the chief reasons why an attempt is made to reject them. I
shall try to show in Lecture VIII that the purely empirical reasons for
accepting images are overwhelming. But we cannot be nearly so certain
that they will not ultimately be brought under the laws of physics. Even
if this should happen, however, they would still be distinguishable
from sensations by their proximate causal laws, as gases remain
distinguishable from solids.

     * "Psychological Review," 1916, "Thought-Content and
     Feeling," p. 59. See also ib., 1912, "The Nature of
     Perceived Relations," where he says: "'Introspection,'
     divested of its mythological suggestion of the observing of
     consciousness, is really the observation of bodily
     sensations (sensibles) and feelings (feelables)"(p. 427 n.).

(3) CAN WE OBSERVE ANYTHING INTRINSICALLY DIFFERENT FROM SENSATIONS? We
come now to our third question concerning introspection. It is commonly
thought that by looking within we can observe all sorts of things that
are radically different from the constituents of the physical world,
e.g. thoughts, beliefs, desires, pleasures, pains and emotions. The
difference between mind and matter is increased partly by emphasizing
these supposed introspective data, partly by the supposition that matter
is composed of atoms or electrons or whatever units physics may at the
moment prefer. As against this latter supposition, I contend that
the ultimate constituents of matter are not atoms or electrons, but
sensations, and other things similar to sensations as regards extent and
duration. As against the view that introspection reveals a mental world
radically different from sensations, I propose to argue that thoughts,
beliefs, desires, pleasures, pains and emotions are all built up out
of sensations and images alone, and that there is reason to think that
images do not differ from sensations in their intrinsic character. We
thus effect a mutual rapprochement of mind and matter, and reduce the
ultimate data of introspection (in our second sense) to images alone. On
this third view of the meaning of introspection, therefore, our decision
is wholly against it.

There remain two points to be considered concerning introspection. The
first is as to how far it is trustworthy; the second is as to whether,
even granting that it reveals no radically different STUFF from that
revealed by what might be called external perception, it may not reveal
different RELATIONS, and thus acquire almost as much importance as is
traditionally assigned to it.

To begin with the trustworthiness of introspection. It is common among
certain schools to regard the knowledge of our own mental processes as
incomparably more certain than our knowledge of the "external" world;
this view is to be found in the British philosophy which descends from
Hume, and is present, somewhat veiled, in Kant and his followers.
There seems no reason whatever to accept this view. Our spontaneous,
unsophisticated beliefs, whether as to ourselves or as to the outer
world, are always extremely rash and very liable to error. The
acquisition of caution is equally necessary and equally difficult in
both directions. Not only are we often un aware of entertaining a
belief or desire which exists in us; we are often actually mistaken. The
fallibility of introspection as regards what we desire is made evident
by psycho-analysis; its fallibility as to what we know is easily
demonstrated. An autobiography, when confronted by a careful editor
with documentary evidence, is usually found to be full of obviously
inadvertent errors. Any of us confronted by a forgotten letter written
some years ago will be astonished to find how much more foolish our
opinions were than we had remembered them as being. And as to the
analysis of our mental operations--believing, desiring, willing, or what
not--introspection unaided gives very little help: it is necessary to
construct hypotheses and test them by their consequences, just as we do
in physical science. Introspection, therefore, though it is one among
our sources of knowledge, is not, in isolation, in any degree more
trustworthy than "external" perception.

I come now to our second question: Does introspection give us materials
for the knowledge of relations other than those arrived at by reflecting
upon external perception? It might be contended that the essence of what
is "mental" consists of relations, such as knowing for example, and that
our knowledge concerning these essentially mental relations is entirely
derived from introspection. If "knowing" were an unanalysable relation,
this view would be incontrovertible, since clearly no such relation
forms part of the subject matter of physics. But it would seem that
"knowing" is really various relations, all of them complex. Therefore,
until they have been analysed, our present question must remain
unanswered I shall return to it at the end of the present course of
lectures.




LECTURE VII. THE DEFINITION OF PERCEPTION

In Lecture V we found reason to think that the ultimate constituents*
of the world do not have the characteristics of either mind or matter
as ordinarily understood: they are not solid persistent objects moving
through space, nor are they fragments of "consciousness." But we found
two ways of grouping particulars, one into "things" or "pieces of
matter," the other into series of "perspectives," each series being what
may be called a "biography." Before we can define either sensations
or images, it is necessary to consider this twofold classification
in somewhat greater detail, and to derive from it a definition of
perception. It should be said that, in so far as the classification
assumes the whole world of physics (including its unperceived portions),
it contains hypothetical elements. But we will not linger on the grounds
for admitting these, which belong to the philosophy of physics rather
than of psychology.

     * When I speak of "ultimate constituents," I do not mean
     necessarily such as are theoretically incapable of analysis,
     but only such as, at present, we can see no means of
     analysing. I speak of such constituents as "particulars," or
     as "RELATIVE particulars" when I wish to emphasize the fact
     that they may be themselves complex.

The physical classification of particulars collects together all those
that are aspects of one "thing." Given any one particular, it is
found often (we do not say always) that there are a number of other
particulars differing from this one in gradually increasing degrees.
Those (or some of those) that differ from it only very slightly will
be found to differ approximately according to certain laws which may be
called, in a generalized sense, the laws of "perspective"; they include
the ordinary laws of perspective as a special case. This approximation
grows more and more nearly exact as the difference grows less; in
technical language, the laws of perspective account for the differences
to the first order of small quantities, and other laws are only
required to account for second-order differences. That is to say, as the
difference diminishes, the part of the difference which is not according
to the laws of perspective diminishes much more rapidly, and bears to
the total difference a ratio which tends towards zero as both are made
smaller and smaller. By this means we can theoretically collect together
a number of particulars which may be defined as the "aspects" or
"appearances" of one thing at one time. If the laws of perspective were
sufficiently known, the connection between different aspects would be
expressed in differential equations.

This gives us, so far, only those particulars which constitute one thing
at one time. This set of particulars may be called a "momentary
thing." To define that series of "momentary things" that constitute
the successive states of one thing is a problem involving the laws of
dynamics. These give the laws governing the changes of aspects from
one time to a slightly later time, with the same sort of differential
approximation to exactness as we obtained for spatially neighbouring
aspects through the laws of perspective. Thus a momentary thing is a set
of particulars, while a thing (which may be identified with the whole
history of the thing) is a series of such sets of particulars.
The particulars in one set are collected together by the laws of
perspective; the successive sets are collected together by the laws
of dynamics. This is the view of the world which is appropriate to
traditional physics.

The definition of a "momentary thing" involves problems concerning time,
since the particulars constituting a momentary thing will not be all
simultaneous, but will travel outward from the thing with the velocity
of light (in case the thing is in vacuo). There are complications
connected with relativity, but for our present purpose they are not
vital, and I shall ignore them.

Instead of first collecting together all the particulars constituting
a momentary thing, and then forming the series of successive sets,
we might have first collected together a series of successive aspects
related by the laws of dynamics, and then have formed the set of such
series related by the laws of perspective. To illustrate by the case of
an actor on the stage: our first plan was to collect together all the
aspects which he presents to different spectators at one time, and then
to form the series of such sets. Our second plan is first to collect
together all the aspects which he presents successively to a given
spectator, and then to do the same thing for the other spectators, thus
forming a set of series instead of a series of sets. The first plan
tells us what he does; the second the impressions he produces. This
second way of classifying particulars is one which obviously has more
relevance to psychology than the other. It is partly by this second
method of classification that we obtain definitions of one "experience"
or "biography" or "person." This method of classification is also
essential to the definition of sensations and images, as I shall
endeavour to prove later on. But we must first amplify the definition of
perspectives and biographies.

In our illustration of the actor, we spoke, for the moment, as though
each spectator's mind were wholly occupied by the one actor. If this
were the case, it might be possible to define the biography of one
spectator as a series of successive aspects of the actor related
according to the laws of dynamics. But in fact this is not the case.
We are at all times during our waking life receiving a variety of
impressions, which are aspects of a variety of things. We have to
consider what binds together two simultaneous sensations in one
person, or, more generally, any two occurrences which forte part of one
experience. We might say, adhering to the standpoint of physics, that
two aspects of different things belong to the same perspective when
they are in the same place. But this would not really help us, since a
"place" has not yet been defined. Can we define what is meant by saying
that two aspects are "in the same place," without introducing anything
beyond the laws of perspective and dynamics?

I do not feel sure whether it is possible to frame such a definition or
not; accordingly I shall not assume that it is possible, but shall
seek other characteristics by which a perspective or biography may be
defined.

When (for example) we see one man and hear another speaking at the
same time, what we see and what we hear have a relation which we
can perceive, which makes the two together form, in some sense, one
experience. It is when this relation exists that two occurrences become
associated. Semon's "engram" is formed by all that we experience at one
time. He speaks of two parts of this total as having the relation of
"Nebeneinander" (M. 118; M.E. 33 ff.), which is reminiscent of Herbart's
"Zusammen." I think the relation may be called simply "simultaneity." It
might be said that at any moment all sorts of things that are not part
of my experience are happening in the world, and that therefore the
relation we are seeking to define cannot be merely simultaneity.
This, however, would be an error--the sort of error that the theory
of relativity avoids. There is not one universal time, except by an
elaborate construction; there are only local times, each of which may
be taken to be the time within one biography. Accordingly, if I am (say)
hearing a sound, the only occurrences that are, in any simple sense,
simultaneous with my sensation are events in my private world, i.e. in
my biography. We may therefore define the "perspective" to which
the sensation in question belongs as the set of particulars that are
simultaneous with this sensation. And similarly we may define the
"biography" to which the sensation belongs as the set of particulars
that are earlier or later than, or simultaneous with, the given
sensation. Moreover, the very same definitions can be applied to
particulars which are not sensations. They are actually required for the
theory of relativity, if we are to give a philosophical explanation
of what is meant by "local time" in that theory The relations of
simultaneity and succession are known to us in our own experience;
they may be analysable, but that does not affect their suitability for
defining perspectives and biographies. Such time-relations as can be
constructed between events in different biographies are of a different
kind: they are not experienced, and are merely logical, being designed
to afford convenient ways of stating the correlations between different
biographies.

It is not only by time-relations that the parts of one biography are
collected together in the case of living beings. In this case there are
the mnemic phenomena which constitute the unity of one "experience," and
transform mere occurrences into "experiences." I have already dwelt upon
the importance of mnemic phenomena for psychology, and shall not
enlarge upon them now, beyond observing that they are what transforms a
biography (in our technical sense) into a life. It is they that give the
continuity of a "person" or a "mind." But there is no reason to suppose
that mnemic phenomena are associated with biographies except in the case
of animals and plants.

Our two-fold classification of particulars gives rise to the dualism of
body and biography in regard to everything in the universe, and not only
in regard to living things. This arises as follows. Every particular of
the sort considered by physics is a member of two groups (1) The group
of particulars constituting the other aspects of the same physical
object; (2) The group of particulars that have direct time-relations to
the given particular.

Each of these is associated with a place. When I look at a star, my
sensation is (1) A member of the group of particulars which is the star,
and which is associated with the place where the star is; (2) A
member of the group of particulars which is my biography, and which is
associated with the place where I am.*

     *I have explained elsewhere the manner in which space is
     constructed on this theory, and in which the position of a
     perspective is brought into relation with the position of a
     physical object ("Our Knowledge of the External World,"
     Lecture III, pp. 90, 91).

The result is that every particular of the kind relevant to physics is
associated with TWO places; e.g. my sensation of the star is associated
with the place where I am and with the place where the star is. This
dualism has nothing to do with any "mind" that I may be supposed to
possess; it exists in exactly the same sense if I am replaced by a
photographic plate. We may call the two places the active and passive
places respectively.* Thus in the case of a perception or photograph
of a star, the active place is the place where the star is, while the
passive place is the place where the percipient or photographic plate
is.

     * I use these as mere names; I do not want to introduce any
     notion of "activity."

We can thus, without departing from physics, collect together all the
particulars actively at a given place, or all the particulars passively
at a given place. In our own case, the one group is our body (or
our brain), while the other is our mind, in so far as it consists of
perceptions. In the case of the photographic plate, the first group is
the plate as dealt with by physics, the second the aspect of the heavens
which it photographs. (For the sake of schematic simplicity, I am
ignoring various complications connected with time, which require some
tedious but perfectly feasible elaborations.) Thus what may be called
subjectivity in the point of view is not a distinctive peculiarity of
mind: it is present just as much in the photographic plate. And the
photographic plate has its biography as well as its "matter." But
this biography is an affair of physics, and has none of the peculiar
characteristics by which "mental" phenomena are distinguished, with the
sole exception of subjectivity.

Adhering, for the moment, to the standpoint of physics, we may define a
"perception" of an object as the appearance of the object from a place
where there is a brain (or, in lower animals, some suitable nervous
structure), with sense-organs and nerves forming part of the intervening
medium. Such appearances of objects are distinguished from appearances
in other places by certain peculiarities, namely:

(1) They give rise to mnemic phenomena;

(2) They are themselves affected by mnemic phenomena.

That is to say, they may be remembered and associated or influence our
habits, or give rise to images, etc., and they are themselves different
from what they would have been if our past experience had been
different--for example, the effect of a spoken sentence upon the hearer
depends upon whether the hearer knows the language or not, which is
a question of past experience. It is these two characteristics, both
connected with mnemic phenomena, that distinguish perceptions from the
appearances of objects in places where there is no living being.

Theoretically, though often not practically, we can, in our perception
of an object, separate the part which is due to past experience from the
part which proceeds without mnemic influences out of the character of
the object. We may define as "sensation" that part which proceeds in
this way, while the remainder, which is a mnemic phenomenon, will have
to be added to the sensation to make up what is called the "perception."
According to this definition, the sensation is a theoretical core in
the actual experience; the actual experience is the perception. It
is obvious that there are grave difficulties in carrying out these
definitions, but we will not linger over them. We have to pass, as soon
as we can, from the physical standpoint, which we have been hitherto
adopting, to the standpoint of psychology, in which we make more use
of introspection in the first of the three senses discussed in the
preceding lecture.

But before making the transition, there are two points which must be
made clear. First: Everything outside my own personal biography is
outside my experience; therefore if anything can be known by me outside
my biography, it can only be known in one of two ways:

(1) By inference from things within my biography, or

(2) By some a priori principle independent of experience.

I do not myself believe that anything approaching certainty is to be
attained by either of these methods, and therefore whatever lies outside
my personal biography must be regarded, theoretically, as hypothesis.
The theoretical argument for adopting the hypothesis is that it
simplifies the statement of the laws according to which events happen
in our experience. But there is no very good ground for supposing that
a simple law is more likely to be true than a complicated law, though
there is good ground for assuming a simple law in scientific practice,
as a working hypothesis, if it explains the facts as well as another
which is less simple. Belief in the existence of things outside my own
biography exists antecedently to evidence, and can only be destroyed, if
at all, by a long course of philosophic doubt. For purposes of science,
it is justified practically by the simplification which it introduces
into the laws of physics. But from the standpoint of theoretical logic
it must be regarded as a prejudice, not as a well-grounded theory. With
this proviso, I propose to continue yielding to the prejudice.

The second point concerns the relating of our point of view to that
which regards sensations as caused by stimuli external to the nervous
system (or at least to the brain), and distinguishes images as
"centrally excited," i.e. due to causes in the brain which cannot be
traced back to anything affecting the sense-organs. It is clear that,
if our analysis of physical objects has been valid, this way of defining
sensations needs reinterpretation. It is also clear that we must be able
to find such a new interpretation if our theory is to be admissible.

To make the matter clear, we will take the simplest possible
illustration. Consider a certain star, and suppose for the moment
that its size is negligible. That is to say, we will regard it as, for
practical purposes, a luminous point. Let us further suppose that it
exists only for a very brief time, say a second. Then, according to
physics, what happens is that a spherical wave of light travels outward
from the star through space, just as, when you drop a stone into a
stagnant pond, ripples travel outward from the place where the stone hit
the water. The wave of light travels with a certain very nearly constant
velocity, roughly 300,000 kilometres per second. This velocity may be
ascertained by sending a flash of light to a mirror, and observing
how long it takes before the reflected flash reaches you, just as the
velocity of sound may be ascertained by means of an echo.

What it is that happens when a wave of light reaches a given place we
cannot tell, except in the sole case when the place in question is a
brain connected with an eye which is turned in the right direction. In
this one very special case we know what happens: we have the sensation
called "seeing the star." In all other cases, though we know (more or
less hypothetically) some of the correlations and abstract properties
of the appearance of the star, we do not know the appearance itself. Now
you may, for the sake of illustration, compare the different appearances
of the star to the conjugation of a Greek verb, except that the number
of its parts is really infinite, and not only apparently so to the
despairing schoolboy. In vacuo, the parts are regular, and can be
derived from the (imaginary) root according to the laws of grammar,
i.e. of perspective. The star being situated in empty space, it may be
defined, for purposes of physics, as consisting of all those appearances
which it presents in vacuo, together with those which, according to
the laws of perspective, it would present elsewhere if its appearances
elsewhere were regular. This is merely the adaptation of the definition
of matter which I gave in an earlier lecture. The appearance of a star
at a certain place, if it is regular, does not require any cause or
explanation beyond the existence of the star. Every regular appearance
is an actual member of the system which is the star, and its causation
is entirely internal to that system. We may express this by saying that
a regular appearance is due to the star alone, and is actually part of
the star, in the sense in which a man is part of the human race.

But presently the light of the star reaches our atmosphere. It begins
to be refracted, and dimmed by mist, and its velocity is slightly
diminished. At last it reaches a human eye, where a complicated process
takes place, ending in a sensation which gives us our grounds for
believing in all that has gone before. Now, the irregular appearances of
the star are not, strictly speaking, members of the system which is the
star, according to our definition of matter. The irregular appearances,
however, are not merely irregular: they proceed according to laws which
can be stated in terms of the matter through which the light has
passed on its way. The sources of an irregular appearance are therefore
twofold:

(1) The object which is appearing irregularly;

2) The intervening medium.

It should be observed that, while the conception of a regular appearance
is perfectly precise, the conception of an irregular appearance is one
capable of any degree of vagueness. When the distorting influence of the
medium is sufficiently great, the resulting particular can no longer be
regarded as an appearance of an object, but must be treated on its own
account. This happens especially when the particular in question cannot
be traced back to one object, but is a blend of two or more. This case
is normal in perception: we see as one what the microscope or telescope
reveals to be many different objects. The notion of perception is
therefore not a precise one: we perceive things more or less, but always
with a very considerable amount of vagueness and confusion.

In considering irregular appearances, there are certain very natural
mistakes which must be avoided. In order that a particular may count as
an irregular appearance of a certain object, it is not necessary that
it should bear any resemblance to the regular appearances as regard
its intrinsic qualities. All that is necessary is that it should be
derivable from the regular appearances by the laws which express
the distorting influence of the medium. When it is so derivable,
the particular in question may be regarded as caused by the regular
appearances, and therefore by the object itself, together with the
modifications resulting from the medium. In other cases, the particular
in question may, in the same sense, be regarded as caused by several
objects together with the medium; in this case, it may be called a
confused appearance of several objects. If it happens to be in a brain,
it may be called a confused perception of these objects. All actual
perception is confused to a greater or less extent.

We can now interpret in terms of our theory the distinction between
those mental occurrences which are said to have an external stimulus,
and those which are said to be "centrally excited," i.e. to have no
stimulus external to the brain. When a mental occurrence can be regarded
as an appearance of an object external to the brain, however irregular,
or even as a confused appearance of several such objects, then we may
regard it as having for its stimulus the object or objects in question,
or their appearances at the sense-organ concerned. When, on the other
hand, a mental occurrence has not sufficient connection with objects
external to the brain to be regarded as an appearance of such objects,
then its physical causation (if any) will have to be sought in the
brain. In the former case it can be called a perception; in the latter
it cannot be so called. But the distinction is one of degree, not of
kind. Until this is realized, no satisfactory theory of perception,
sensation, or imagination is possible.




LECTURE VIII. SENSATIONS AND IMAGES

The dualism of mind and matter, if we have been right so far, cannot be
allowed as metaphysically valid. Nevertheless, we seem to find a certain
dualism, perhaps not ultimate, within the world as we observe it. The
dualism is not primarily as to the stuff of the world, but as to causal
laws. On this subject we may again quote William James. He points out
that when, as we say, we merely "imagine" things, there are no such
effects as would ensue if the things were what we call "real." He takes
the case of imagining a fire.

"I make for myself an experience of blazing fire; I place it near my
body; but it does not warm me in the least. I lay a stick upon it and
the stick either burns or remains green, as I please. I call up water,
and pour it on the fire, and absolutely no difference ensues. I account
for all such facts by calling this whole train of experiences unreal, a
mental train. Mental fire is what won't burn real sticks; mental water
is what won't necessarily (though of course it may) put out even a
mental fire.... With 'real' objects, on the contrary, consequences
always accrue; and thus the real experiences get sifted from the mental
ones, the things from our thoughts of them, fanciful or true, and
precipitated together as the stable part of the whole experience--chaos,
under the name of the physical world."*

     * "Essays in Radical Empiricism," pp. 32-3.

In this passage James speaks, by mere inadvertence, as though the
phenomena which he is describing as "mental" had NO effects. This is, of
course, not the case: they have their effects, just as much as physical
phenomena do, but their effects follow different laws. For example,
dreams, as Freud has shown, are just as much subject to laws as are the
motions of the planets. But the laws are different: in a dream you may
be transported from one place to another in a moment, or one person
may turn into another under your eyes. Such differences compel you to
distinguish the world of dreams from the physical world.

If the two sorts of causal laws could be sharply distinguished, we could
call an occurrence "physical" when it obeys causal laws appropriate to
the physical world, and "mental" when it obeys causal laws appropriate
to the mental world. Since the mental world and the physical world
interact, there would be a boundary between the two: there would be
events which would have physical causes and mental effects, while there
would be others which would have mental causes and physical effects.
Those that have physical causes and mental effects we should define as
"sensations." Those that have mental causes and physical effects might
perhaps be identified with what we call voluntary movements; but they do
not concern us at present.

These definitions would have all the precision that could be desired if
the distinction between physical and psychological causation were clear
and sharp. As a matter of fact, however, this distinction is, as yet, by
no means sharp. It is possible that, with fuller knowledge, it will be
found to be no more ultimate than the distinction between the laws of
gases and the laws of rigid bodies. It also suffers from the fact that
an event may be an effect of several causes according to several causal
laws we cannot, in general, point to anything unique as THE cause of
such-and-such an event. And finally it is by no means certain that
the peculiar causal laws which govern mental events are not really
physiological. The law of habit, which is one of the most distinctive,
may be fully explicable in terms of the peculiarities of nervous tissue,
and these peculiarities, in turn, may be explicable by the laws of
physics. It seems, therefore, that we are driven to a different kind of
definition. It is for this reason that it was necessary to develop
the definition of perception. With this definition, we can define a
sensation as the non-mnemic elements in a perception.

When, following our definition, we try to decide what elements in our
experience are of the nature of sensations, we find more difficulty
than might have been expected. Prima facie, everything is sensation that
comes to us through the senses: the sights we see, the sounds we hear,
the smells we smell, and so on; also such things as headache or the
feeling of muscular strain. But in actual fact so much interpretation,
so much of habitual correlation, is mixed with all such experiences,
that the core of pure sensation is only to be extracted by careful
investigation. To take a simple illustration: if you go to the theatre
in your own country, you seem to hear equally well in the stalls or the
dress circle; in either case you think you miss nothing. But if you go
in a foreign country where you have a fair knowledge of the language,
you will seem to have grown partially deaf, and you will find it
necessary to be much nearer the stage than you would need to be in your
own country. The reason is that, in hearing our own language spoken, we
quickly and unconsciously fill out what we really hear with inferences
to what the man must be saying, and we never realize that we have not
heard the words we have merely inferred. In a foreign language, these
inferences are more difficult, and we are more dependent upon actual
sensation. If we found ourselves in a foreign world, where tables looked
like cushions and cushions like tables, we should similarly discover how
much of what we think we see is really inference. Every fairly familiar
sensation is to us a sign of the things that usually go with it, and
many of these things will seem to form part of the sensation. I remember
in the early days of motor-cars being with a friend when a tyre burst
with a loud report. He thought it was a pistol, and supported his
opinion by maintaining that he had seen the flash. But of course there
had been no flash. Nowadays no one sees a flash when a tyre bursts.

In order, therefore, to arrive at what really is sensation in an
occurrence which, at first sight, seems to contain nothing else, we have
to pare away all that is due to habit or expectation or interpretation.
This is a matter for the psychologist, and by no means an easy matter.
For our purposes, it is not important to determine what exactly is the
sensational core in any case; it is only important to notice that
there certainly is a sensational core, since habit, expectation and
interpretation are diversely aroused on diverse occasions, and the
diversity is clearly due to differences in what is presented to
the senses. When you open your newspaper in the morning, the actual
sensations of seeing the print form a very minute part of what goes
on in you, but they are the starting-point of all the rest, and it
is through them that the newspaper is a means of information or
mis-information. Thus, although it may be difficult to determine what
exactly is sensation in any given experience, it is clear that there is
sensation, unless, like Leibniz, we deny all action of the outer world
upon us.

Sensations are obviously the source of our knowledge of the world,
including our own body. It might seem natural to regard a sensation as
itself a cognition, and until lately I did so regard it. When, say, I
see a person I know coming towards me in the street, it SEEMS as
though the mere seeing were knowledge. It is of course undeniable that
knowledge comes THROUGH the seeing, but I think it is a mistake to
regard the mere seeing itself as knowledge. If we are so to regard it,
we must distinguish the seeing from what is seen: we must say that, when
we see a patch of colour of a certain shape, the patch of colour is one
thing and our seeing of it is another. This view, however, demands the
admission of the subject, or act, in the sense discussed in our first
lecture. If there is a subject, it can have a relation to the patch of
colour, namely, the sort of relation which we might call awareness. In
that case the sensation, as a mental event, will consist of awareness of
the colour, while the colour itself will remain wholly physical, and
may be called the sense-datum, to distinguish it from the sensation.
The subject, however, appears to be a logical fiction, like mathematical
points and instants. It is introduced, not because observation reveals
it, but because it is linguistically convenient and apparently demanded
by grammar. Nominal entities of this sort may or may not exist, but
there is no good ground for assuming that they do. The functions that
they appear to perform can always be performed by classes or series or
other logical constructions, consisting of less dubious entities. If we
are to avoid a perfectly gratuitous assumption, we must dispense with
the subject as one of the actual ingredients of the world. But when
we do this, the possibility of distinguishing the sensation from
the sense-datum vanishes; at least I see no way of preserving the
distinction. Accordingly the sensation that we have when we see a patch
of colour simply is that patch of colour, an actual constituent of the
physical world, and part of what physics is concerned with. A patch of
colour is certainly not knowledge, and therefore we cannot say that pure
sensation is cognitive. Through its psychological effects, it is the
cause of cognitions, partly by being itself a sign of things that
are correlated with it, as e.g. sensations of sight and touch are
correlated, and partly by giving rise to images and memories after the
sensation is faded. But in itself the pure sensation is not cognitive.

In the first lecture we considered the view of Brentano, that "we may
define psychical phenomena by saying that they are phenomena which
intentionally contain an object." We saw reasons to reject this view in
general; we are now concerned to show that it must be rejected in the
particular case of sensations. The kind of argument which formerly made
me accept Brentano's view in this case was exceedingly simple. When I
see a patch of colour, it seemed to me that the colour is not psychical,
but physical, while my seeing is not physical, but psychical. Hence
I concluded that the colour is something other than my seeing of
the colour. This argument, to me historically, was directed against
idealism: the emphatic part of it was the assertion that the colour is
physical, not psychical. I shall not trouble you now with the grounds
for holding as against Berkeley that the patch of colour is physical; I
have set them forth before, and I see no reason to modify them. But it
does not follow that the patch of colour is not also psychical, unless
we assume that the physical and the psychical cannot overlap, which I
no longer consider a valid assumption. If we admit--as I think we
should--that the patch of colour may be both physical and psychical, the
reason for distinguishing the sense-datum from the sensation disappears,
and we may say that the patch of colour and our sensation in seeing it
are identical.

This is the view of William James, Professor Dewey, and the American
realists. Perceptions, says Professor Dewey, are not per se cases of
knowledge, but simply natural events with no more knowledge status
than (say) a shower. "Let them [the realists] try the experiment of
conceiving perceptions as pure natural events, not cases of awareness or
apprehension, and they will be surprised to see how little they miss."*
I think he is right in this, except in supposing that the realists will
be surprised. Many of them already hold the view he is advocating, and
others are very sympathetic to it. At any rate, it is the view which I
shall adopt in these lectures.

     * Dewey, "Essays in Experimental Logic," pp. 253, 262.

The stuff of the world, so far as we have experience of it, consists, on
the view that I am advocating, of innumerable transient particulars such
as occur in seeing, hearing, etc., together with images more or less
resembling these, of which I shall speak shortly. If physics is true,
there are, besides the particulars that we experience, others, probably
equally (or almost equally) transient, which make up that part of the
material world that does not come into the sort of contact with a
living body that is required to turn it into a sensation. But this topic
belongs to the philosophy of physics, and need not concern us in our
present inquiry.

Sensations are what is common to the mental and physical worlds; they
may be defined as the intersection of mind and matter. This is by no
means a new view; it is advocated, not only by the American authors I
have mentioned, but by Mach in his Analysis of Sensations, which was
published in 1886. The essence of sensation, according to the view I am
advocating, is its independence of past experience. It is a core in our
actual experiences, never existing in isolation except possibly in very
young infants. It is not itself knowledge, but it supplies the data for
our knowledge of the physical world, including our own bodies.

There are some who believe that our mental life is built up out of
sensations alone. This may be true; but in any case I think the only
ingredients required in addition to sensations are images. What images
are, and how they are to be defined, we have now to inquire.

The distinction between images and sensations might seem at first sight
by no means difficult. When we shut our eyes and call up pictures of
familiar scenes, we usually have no difficulty, so long as we remain
awake, in discriminating between what we are imagining and what is
really seen. If we imagine some piece of music that we know, we can go
through it in our mind from beginning to end without any discoverable
tendency to suppose that we are really hearing it. But although such
cases are so clear that no confusion seems possible, there are many
others that are far more difficult, and the definition of images is by
no means an easy problem.

To begin with: we do not always know whether what we are experiencing is
a sensation or an image. The things we see in dreams when our eyes are
shut must count as images, yet while we are dreaming they seem like
sensations. Hallucinations often begin as persistent images, and only
gradually acquire that influence over belief that makes the patient
regard them as sensations. When we are listening for a faint sound--the
striking of a distant clock, or a horse's hoofs on the road--we think
we hear it many times before we really do, because expectation brings
us the image, and we mistake it for sensation. The distinction between
images and sensations is, therefore, by no means always obvious to
inspection.*

     * On the distinction between images and sensation, cf.
     Semon, "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," pp. 19-20.

We may consider three different ways in which it has been sought to
distinguish images from sensations, namely:

(1) By the less degree of vividness in images;

(2) By our absence of belief in their "physical reality";

(3) By the fact that their causes and effects are different from those
of sensations.

I believe the third of these to be the only universally applicable
criterion. The other two are applicable in very many cases, but
cannot be used for purposes of definition because they are liable to
exceptions. Nevertheless, they both deserve to be carefully considered.

(1) Hume, who gives the names "impressions" and "ideas" to what may,
for present purposes, be identified with our "sensations" and "images,"
speaks of impressions as "those perceptions which enter with most force
and violence" while he defines ideas as "the faint images of these (i.e.
of impressions) in thinking and reasoning." His immediately following
observations, however, show the inadequacy of his criteria of "force"
and "faintness." He says:

"I believe it will not be very necessary to employ many words in
explaining this distinction. Every one of himself will readily perceive
the difference betwixt feeling and thinking. The common degrees of these
are easily distinguished, though it is not impossible but in particular
instances they may very nearly approach to each other. Thus in sleep, in
a fever, in madness, or in any very violent emotions of soul, our ideas
may approach to our impressions; as, on the other hand, it sometimes
happens, that our impressions are so faint and low that we cannot
distinguish them from our ideas. But notwithstanding this near
resemblance in a few instances, they are in general so very different,
that no one can make a scruple to rank them under distinct heads, and
assign to each a peculiar name to mark the difference" ("Treatise of
Human Nature," Part I, Section I).

I think Hume is right in holding that they should be ranked under
distinct heads, with a peculiar name for each. But by his own confession
in the above passage, his criterion for distinguishing them is not
always adequate. A definition is not sound if it only applies in cases
where the difference is glaring: the essential purpose of a definition
is to provide a mark which is applicable even in marginal cases--except,
of course, when we are dealing with a conception, like, e.g. baldness,
which is one of degree and has no sharp boundaries. But so far we have
seen no reason to think that the difference between sensations and
images is only one of degree.

Professor Stout, in his "Manual of Psychology," after discussing various
ways of distinguishing sensations and images, arrives at a view which is
a modification of Hume's. He says (I quote from the second edition):

"Our conclusion is that at bottom the distinction between image
and percept, as respectively faint and vivid states, is based on a
difference of quality. The percept has an aggressiveness which does not
belong to the image. It strikes the mind with varying degrees of force
or liveliness according to the varying intensity of the stimulus. This
degree of force or liveliness is part of what we ordinarily mean by
the intensity of a sensation. But this constituent of the intensity of
sensations is absent in mental imagery"(p. 419).

This view allows for the fact that sensations may reach any degree of
faintness--e.g. in the case of a just visible star or a just audible
sound--without becoming images, and that therefore mere faintness cannot
be the characteristic mark of images. After explaining the sudden shock
of a flash of lightning or a steam-whistle, Stout says that "no mere
image ever does strike the mind in this manner"(p. 417). But I believe
that this criterion fails in very much the same instances as those in
which Hume's criterion fails in its original form. Macbeth speaks of--

               that suggestion
           Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
     And make my seated heart knock at my ribs
     Against the use of nature.

The whistle of a steam-engine could hardly have a stronger effect than
this. A very intense emotion will often bring with it--especially
where some future action or some undecided issue is involved--powerful
compelling images which may determine the whole course of life, sweeping
aside all contrary solicitations to the will by their capacity for
exclusively possessing the mind. And in all cases where images,
originally recognized as such, gradually pass into hallucinations, there
must be just that "force or liveliness" which is supposed to be always
absent from images. The cases of dreams and fever-delirium are as
hard to adjust to Professor Stout's modified criterion as to Hume's. I
conclude therefore that the test of liveliness, however applicable in
ordinary instances, cannot be used to define the differences between
sensations and images.

(2) We might attempt to distinguish images from sensations by our
absence of belief in the "physical reality" of images. When we are aware
that what we are experiencing is an image, we do not give it the kind of
belief that we should give to a sensation: we do not think that it has
the same power of producing knowledge of the "external world." Images
are "imaginary"; in SOME sense they are "unreal." But this difference
is hard to analyse or state correctly. What we call the "unreality" of
images requires interpretation it cannot mean what would be expressed
by saying "there's no such thing." Images are just as truly part of the
actual world as sensations are. All that we really mean by calling an
image "unreal" is that it does not have the concomitants which it would
have if it were a sensation. When we call up a visual image of a chair,
we do not attempt to sit in it, because we know that, like Macbeth's
dagger, it is not "sensible to feeling as to sight"--i.e. it does not
have the correlations with tactile sensations which it would have if it
were a visual sensation and not merely a visual image. But this means
that the so-called "unreality" of images consists merely in their not
obeying the laws of physics, and thus brings us back to the causal
distinction between images and sensations.

This view is confirmed by the fact that we only feel images to be
"unreal" when we already know them to be images. Images cannot be
defined by the FEELING of unreality, because when we falsely believe an
image to be a sensation, as in the case of dreams, it FEELS just as real
as if it were a sensation. Our feeling of unreality results from our
having already realized that we are dealing with an image, and cannot
therefore be the definition of what we mean by an image. As soon as an
image begins to deceive us as to its status, it also deceives us as to
its correlations, which are what we mean by its "reality."

(3) This brings us to the third mode of distinguishing images from
sensations, namely, by their causes and effects. I believe this to be
the only valid ground of distinction. James, in the passage about the
mental fire which won't burn real sticks, distinguishes images by their
effects, but I think the more reliable distinction is by their causes.
Professor Stout (loc. cit., p. 127) says: "One characteristic mark of
what we agree in calling sensation is its mode of production. It is
caused by what we call a STIMULUS. A stimulus is always some condition
external to the nervous system itself and operating upon it." I think
that this is the correct view, and that the distinction between images
and sensations can only be made by taking account of their causation.
Sensations come through sense-organs, while images do not. We cannot
have visual sensations in the dark, or with our eyes shut, but we can
very well have visual images under these circumstances. Accordingly
images have been defined as "centrally excited sensations," i.e.
sensations which have their physiological cause in the brain only, not
also in the sense-organs and the nerves that run from the sense-organs
to the brain. I think the phrase "centrally excited sensations" assumes
more than is necessary, since it takes it for granted that an image must
have a proximate physiological cause. This is probably true, but it is
an hypothesis, and for our purposes an unnecessary one. It would seem to
fit better with what we can immediately observe if we were to say that
an image is occasioned, through association, by a sensation or another
image, in other words that it has a mnemic cause--which does not prevent
it from also having a physical cause. And I think it will be found that
the causation of an image always proceeds according to mnemic laws, i.e.
that it is governed by habit and past experience. If you listen to a man
playing the pianola without looking at him, you will have images of his
hands on the keys as if he were playing the piano; if you suddenly look
at him while you are absorbed in the music, you will experience a shock
of surprise when you notice that his hands are not touching the notes.
Your image of his hands is due to the many times that you have heard
similar sounds and at the same time seen the player's hands on the
piano. When habit and past experience play this part, we are in the
region of mnemic as opposed to ordinary physical causation. And I think
that, if we could regard as ultimately valid the difference between
physical and mnemic causation, we could distinguish images from
sensations as having mnemic causes, though they may also have physical
causes. Sensations, on the other hand, will only have physical causes.

However this may be, the practically effective distinction between
sensations and images is that in the causation of sensations, but not
of images, the stimulation of nerves carrying an effect into the brain,
usually from the surface of the body, plays an essential part. And
this accounts for the fact that images and sensations cannot always be
distinguished by their intrinsic nature.

Images also differ from sensations as regards their effects. Sensations,
as a rule, have both physical and mental effects. As you watch the train
you meant to catch leaving the station, there are both the successive
positions of the train (physical effects) and the successive waves
of fury and disappointment (mental effects). Images, on the contrary,
though they MAY produce bodily movements, do so according to mnemic
laws, not according to the laws of physics. All their effects, of
whatever nature, follow mnemic laws. But this difference is less
suitable for definition than the difference as to causes.

Professor Watson, as a logical carrying-out of his behaviourist theory,
denies altogether that there are any observable phenomena such as
images are supposed to be. He replaces them all by faint sensations, and
especially by pronunciation of words sotto voce. When we "think" of a
table (say), as opposed to seeing it, what happens, according to him, is
usually that we are making small movements of the throat and tongue
such as would lead to our uttering the word "table" if they were more
pronounced. I shall consider his view again in connection with words;
for the present I am only concerned to combat his denial of images. This
denial is set forth both in his book on "Behavior" and in an article
called "Image and Affection in Behavior" in the "Journal of Philosophy,
Psychology and Scientific Methods," vol. x (July, 1913). It seems to me
that in this matter he has been betrayed into denying plain facts in
the interests of a theory, namely, the supposed impossibility of
introspection. I dealt with the theory in Lecture VI; for the present I
wish to reinforce the view that the facts are undeniable.

Images are of various sorts, according to the nature of the sensations
which they copy. Images of bodily movements, such as we have when we
imagine moving an arm or, on a smaller scale, pronouncing a word,
might possibly be explained away on Professor Watson's lines, as really
consisting in small incipient movements such as, if magnified and
prolonged, would be the movements we are said to be imagining. Whether
this is the case or not might even be decided experimentally. If there
were a delicate instrument for recording small movements in the mouth
and throat, we might place such an instrument in a person's mouth and
then tell him to recite a poem to himself, as far as possible only in
imagination. I should not be at all surprised if it were found that
actual small movements take place while he is "mentally" saying over
the verses. The point is important, because what is called "thought"
consists mainly (though I think not wholly) of inner speech. If
Professor Watson is right as regards inner speech, this whole region
is transferred from imagination to sensation. But since the question
is capable of experimental decision, it would be gratuitous rashness to
offer an opinion while that decision is lacking.

But visual and auditory images are much more difficult to deal with in
this way, because they lack the connection with physical events in the
outer world which belongs to visual and auditory sensations. Suppose,
for example, that I am sitting in my room, in which there is an empty
arm-chair. I shut my eyes, and call up a visual image of a friend
sitting in the arm-chair. If I thrust my image into the world of
physics, it contradicts all the usual physical laws. My friend reached
the chair without coming in at the door in the usual way; subsequent
inquiry will show that he was somewhere else at the moment. If regarded
as a sensation, my image has all the marks of the supernatural. My
image, therefore, is regarded as an event in me, not as having that
position in the orderly happenings of the public world that belongs to
sensations. By saying that it is an event in me, we leave it possible
that it may be PHYSIOLOGICALLY caused: its privacy may be only due to
its connection with my body. But in any case it is not a public event,
like an actual person walking in at the door and sitting down in
my chair. And it cannot, like inner speech, be regarded as a SMALL
sensation, since it occupies just as large an area in my visual field as
the actual sensation would do.

Professor Watson says: "I should throw out imagery altogether
and attempt to show that all natural thought goes on in terms of
sensori-motor processes in the larynx." This view seems to me flatly to
contradict experience. If you try to persuade any uneducated person that
she cannot call up a visual picture of a friend sitting in a chair, but
can only use words describing what such an occurrence would be like,
she will conclude that you are mad. (This statement is based upon
experiment.) Galton, as every one knows, investigated visual imagery,
and found that education tends to kill it: the Fellows of the Royal
Society turned out to have much less of it than their wives. I see no
reason to doubt his conclusion that the habit of abstract pursuits makes
learned men much inferior to the average in power of visualizing, and
much more exclusively occupied with words in their "thinking." And
Professor Watson is a very learned man.

I shall henceforth assume that the existence of images is admitted, and
that they are to be distinguished from sensations by their causes,
as well as, in a lesser degree, by their effects. In their intrinsic
nature, though they often differ from sensations by being more dim
or vague or faint, yet they do not always or universally differ from
sensations in any way that can be used for defining them. Their privacy
need form no bar to the scientific study of them, any more than the
privacy of bodily sensations does. Bodily sensations are admitted by
even the most severe critics of introspection, although, like images,
they can only be observed by one observer. It must be admitted, however,
that the laws of the appearance and disappearance of images are little
known and difficult to discover, because we are not assisted, as in the
case of sensations, by our knowledge of the physical world.

There remains one very important point concerning images, which will
occupy us much hereafter, and that is, their resemblance to previous
sensations. They are said to be "copies" of sensations, always as
regards the simple qualities that enter into them, though not always
as regards the manner in which these are put together. It is generally
believed that we cannot imagine a shade of colour that we have never
seen, or a sound that we have never heard. On this subject Hume is the
classic. He says, in the definitions already quoted:

"Those perceptions, which enter with most force and violence, we may
name IMPRESSIONS; and under this name I comprehend all our sensations,
passions and emotions, as they make their first appearance in the soul.
By IDEAS I mean the faint images of these in thinking and reasoning."

He next explains the difference between simple and complex ideas, and
explains that a complex idea may occur without any similar complex
impression. But as regards simple ideas, he states that "every simple
idea has a simple impression, which resembles it, and every simple
impression a correspondent idea." He goes on to enunciate the general
principle "that all our simple ideas in their first appearance are
derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, and
which they exactly represent" ("Treatise of Human Nature," Part I,
Section I).

It is this fact, that images resemble antecedent sensations, which
enables us to call them images "of" this or that. For the understanding
of memory, and of knowledge generally, the recognizable resemblance of
images and sensations is of fundamental importance.

There are difficulties in establishing Hume's principles, and doubts
as to whether it is exactly true. Indeed, he himself signalized an
exception immediately after stating his maxim. Nevertheless, it is
impossible to doubt that in the main simple images are copies of similar
simple sensations which have occurred earlier, and that the same is true
of complex images in all cases of memory as opposed to mere imagination.
Our power of acting with reference to what is sensibly absent is largely
due to this characteristic of images, although, as education advances,
images tend to be more and more replaced by words. We shall have much
to say in the next two lectures on the subject of images as copies of
sensations. What has been said now is merely by way of reminder that
this is their most notable characteristic.

I am by no means confident that the distinction between images and
sensations is ultimately valid, and I should be glad to be convinced
that images can be reduced to sensations of a peculiar kind. I think it
is clear, however, that, at any rate in the case of auditory and visual
images, they do differ from ordinary auditory and visual sensations, and
therefore form a recognizable class of occurrences, even if it should
prove that they can be regarded as a sub-class of sensations. This is
all that is necessary to validate the use of images to be made in the
sequel.




LECTURE IX. MEMORY

Memory, which we are to consider to-day, introduces us to knowledge in
one of its forms. The analysis of knowledge will occupy us until the end
of the thirteenth lecture, and is the most difficult part of our whole
enterprise.

I do not myself believe that the analysis of knowledge can be effected
entirely by means of purely external observation, such as behaviourists
employ. I shall discuss this question in later lectures. In the present
lecture I shall attempt the analysis of memory-knowledge, both as an
introduction to the problem of knowledge in general, and because memory,
in some form, is presupposed in almost all other knowledge. Sensation,
we decided, is not a form of knowledge. It might, however, have
been expected that we should begin our discussion of knowledge with
PERCEPTION, i.e. with that integral experience of things in the
environment, out of which sensation is extracted by psychological
analysis. What is called perception differs from sensation by the fact
that the sensational ingredients bring up habitual associates--images
and expectations of their usual correlates--all of which are
subjectively indistinguishable from the sensation. The FACT of past
experience is essential in producing this filling-out of sensation, but
not the RECOLLECTION of past experience. The non-sensational elements in
perception can be wholly explained as the result of habit, produced
by frequent correlations. Perception, according to our definition in
Lecture VII, is no more a form of knowledge than sensation is, except
in so far as it involves expectations. The purely psychological problems
which it raises are not very difficult, though they have sometimes been
rendered artificially obscure by unwillingness to admit the fallibility
of the non-sensational elements of perception. On the other hand, memory
raises many difficult and very important problems, which it is necessary
to consider at the first possible moment.

One reason for treating memory at this early stage is that it seems to
be involved in the fact that images are recognized as "copies" of
past sensible experience. In the preceding lecture I alluded to Hume's
principle "that all our simple ideas in their first appearance are
derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, and
which they exactly represent." Whether or not this principle is liable
to exceptions, everyone would agree that is has a broad measure of
truth, though the word "exactly" might seem an overstatement, and
it might seem more correct to say that ideas APPROXIMATELY represent
impressions. Such modifications of Hume's principle, however, do not
affect the problem which I wish to present for your consideration,
namely: Why do we believe that images are, sometimes or always,
approximately or exactly, copies of sensations? What sort of evidence is
there? And what sort of evidence is logically possible? The difficulty
of this question arises through the fact that the sensation which an
image is supposed to copy is in the past when the image exists, and can
therefore only be known by memory, while, on the other hand, memory of
past sensations seems only possible by means of present images. How,
then, are we to find any way of comparing the present image and the past
sensation? The problem is just as acute if we say that images differ
from their prototypes as if we say that they resemble them; it is the
very possibility of comparison that is hard to understand.* We think
we can know that they are alike or different, but we cannot bring them
together in one experience and compare them. To deal with this problem,
we must have a theory of memory. In this way the whole status of images
as "copies" is bound up with the analysis of memory.

     * How, for example, can we obtain such knowledge as the
     following: "If we look at, say, a red nose and perceive it,
     and after a little while ekphore, its memory-image, we note
     immediately how unlike, in its likeness, this memory-image
     is to the original perception" (A. Wohlgemuth, "On the
     Feelings and their Neural Correlate with an Examination of
     the Nature of Pain," "Journal of Psychology," vol. viii,
     part iv, June, 1917).

In investigating memory-beliefs, there are certain points which must
be borne in mind. In the first place, everything constituting a
memory-belief is happening now, not in that past time to which the
belief is said to refer. It is not logically necessary to the existence
of a memory-belief that the event remembered should have occurred,
or even that the past should have existed at all. There is no logical
impossibility in the hypothesis that the world sprang into being five
minutes ago, exactly as it then was, with a population that "remembered"
a wholly unreal past. There is no logically necessary connection between
events at different times; therefore nothing that is happening now or
will happen in the future can disprove the hypothesis that the world
began five minutes ago. Hence the occurrences which are CALLED knowledge
of the past are logically independent of the past; they are wholly
analysable into present contents, which might, theoretically, be just
what they are even if no past had existed.

I am not suggesting that the non-existence of the past should be
entertained as a serious hypothesis. Like all sceptical hypotheses, it
is logically tenable, but uninteresting. All that I am doing is to use
its logical tenability as a help in the analysis of what occurs when we
remember.

In the second place, images without beliefs are insufficient to
constitute memory; and habits are still more insufficient. The
behaviourist, who attempts to make psychology a record of behaviour, has
to trust his memory in making the record. "Habit" is a concept involving
the occurrence of similar events at different times; if the behaviourist
feels confident that there is such a phenomenon as habit, that can only
be because he trusts his memory, when it assures him that there have
been other times. And the same applies to images. If we are to know as
it is supposed we do--that images are "copies," accurate or inaccurate,
of past events, something more than the mere occurrence of images must
go to constitute this knowledge. For their mere occurrence, by itself,
would not suggest any connection with anything that had happened before.

Can we constitute memory out of images together with suitable beliefs?
We may take it that memory-images, when they occur in true memory, are
(a) known to be copies, (b) sometimes known to be imperfect copies
(cf. footnote on previous page). How is it possible to know that a
memory-image is an imperfect copy, without having a more accurate copy
by which to replace it? This would SEEM to suggest that we have a way
of knowing the past which is independent of images, by means of which
we can criticize image-memories. But I do not think such an inference is
warranted.

What results, formally, from our knowledge of the past through images
of which we recognize the inaccuracy, is that such images must have two
characteristics by which we can arrange them in two series, of which one
corresponds to the more or less remote period in the past to which
they refer, and the other to our greater or less confidence in their
accuracy. We will take the second of these points first.

Our confidence or lack of confidence in the accuracy of a memory-image
must, in fundamental cases, be based upon a characteristic of the image
itself, since we cannot evoke the past bodily and compare it with the
present image. It might be suggested that vagueness is the required
characteristic, but I do not think this is the case. We sometimes
have images that are by no means peculiarly vague, which yet we do not
trust--for example, under the influence of fatigue we may see a friend's
face vividly and clearly, but horribly distorted. In such a case we
distrust our image in spite of its being unusually clear. I think
the characteristic by which we distinguish the images we trust is the
feeling of FAMILIARITY that accompanies them. Some images, like some
sensations, feel very familiar, while others feel strange. Familiarity
is a feeling capable of degrees. In an image of a well-known face,
for example, some parts may feel more familiar than others; when this
happens, we have more belief in the accuracy of the familiar parts than
in that of the unfamiliar parts. I think it is by this means that we
become critical of images, not by some imageless memory with which
we compare them. I shall return to the consideration of familiarity
shortly.

I come now to the other characteristic which memory-images must have
in order to account for our knowledge of the past. They must have some
characteristic which makes us regard them as referring to more or less
remote portions of the past. That is to say if we suppose that A is the
event remembered, B the remembering, and t the interval of time between
A and B, there must be some characteristic of B which is capable of
degrees, and which, in accurately dated memories, varies as t varies.
It may increase as t increases, or diminish as t increases. The question
which of these occurs is not of any importance for the theoretic
serviceability of the characteristic in question.

In actual fact, there are doubtless various factors that concur in
giving us the feeling of greater or less remoteness in some remembered
event. There may be a specific feeling which could be called the feeling
of "pastness," especially where immediate memory is concerned. But apart
from this, there are other marks. One of these is context. A recent
memory has, usually, more context than a more distant one. When a
remembered event has a remembered context, this may occur in two ways,
either (a) by successive images in the same order as their prototypes,
or (b) by remembering a whole process simultaneously, in the same way in
which a present process may be apprehended, through akoluthic sensations
which, by fading, acquire the mark of just-pastness in an increasing
degree as they fade, and are thus placed in a series while all sensibly
present. It will be context in this second sense, more specially, that
will give us a sense of the nearness or remoteness of a remembered
event.

There is, of course, a difference between knowing the temporal relation
of a remembered event to the present, and knowing the time-order of two
remembered events. Very often our knowledge of the temporal relation
of a remembered event to the present is inferred from its temporal
relations to other remembered events. It would seem that only rather
recent events can be placed at all accurately by means of feelings
giving their temporal relation to the present, but it is clear that such
feelings must play an essential part in the process of dating remembered
events.

We may say, then, that images are regarded by us as more or less
accurate copies of past occurrences because they come to us with two
sorts of feelings: (1) Those that may be called feelings of familiarity;
(2) those that may be collected together as feelings giving a sense of
pastness. The first lead us to trust our memories, the second to assign
places to them in the time-order.

We have now to analyse the memory-belief, as opposed to the
characteristics of images which lead us to base memory-beliefs upon
them.

If we had retained the "subject" or "act" in knowledge, the whole
problem of memory would have been comparatively simple. We could then
have said that remembering is a direct relation between the present act
or subject and the past occurrence remembered: the act of remembering
is present, though its object is past. But the rejection of the subject
renders some more complicated theory necessary. Remembering has to be
a present occurrence in some way resembling, or related to, what is
remembered. And it is difficult to find any ground, except a pragmatic
one, for supposing that memory is not sheer delusion, if, as seems to be
the case, there is not, apart from memory, any way of ascertaining that
there really was a past occurrence having the required relation to our
present remembering. What, if we followed Meinong's terminology, we
should call the "object" in memory, i.e. the past event which we are
said to be remembering, is unpleasantly remote from the "content," i.e.
the present mental occurrence in remembering. There is an awkward gulf
between the two, which raises difficulties for the theory of knowledge.
But we must not falsify observation to avoid theoretical difficulties.
For the present, therefore, let us forget these problems, and try to
discover what actually occurs in memory.

Some points may be taken as fixed, and such as any theory of memory must
arrive at. In this case, as in most others, what may be taken as certain
in advance is rather vague. The study of any topic is like the continued
observation of an object which is approaching us along a road: what is
certain to begin with is the quite vague knowledge that there is SOME
object on the road. If you attempt to be less vague, and to assert that
the object is an elephant, or a man, or a mad dog, you run a risk of
error; but the purpose of continued observation is to enable you to
arrive at such more precise knowledge. In like manner, in the study of
memory, the certainties with which you begin are very vague, and the
more precise propositions at which you try to arrive are less certain
than the hazy data from which you set out. Nevertheless, in spite of the
risk of error, precision is the goal at which we must aim.

The first of our vague but indubitable data is that there is knowledge
of the past. We do not yet know with any precision what we mean by
"knowledge," and we must admit that in any given instance our memory may
be at fault. Nevertheless, whatever a sceptic might urge in theory,
we cannot practically doubt that we got up this morning, that we did
various things yesterday, that a great war has been taking place, and so
on. How far our knowledge of the past is due to memory, and how far to
other sources, is of course a matter to be investigated, but there can
be no doubt that memory forms an indispensable part of our knowledge of
the past.

The second datum is that we certainly have more capacity for knowing the
past than for knowing the future. We know some things about the future,
for example what eclipses there will be; but this knowledge is a matter
of elaborate calculation and inference, whereas some of our knowledge of
the past comes to us without effort, in the same sort of immediate way
in which we acquire knowledge of occurrences in our present environment.
We might provisionally, though perhaps not quite correctly, define
"memory" as that way of knowing about the past which has no analogue in
our knowledge of the future; such a definition would at least serve to
mark the problem with which we are concerned, though some expectations
may deserve to rank with memory as regards immediacy.

A third point, perhaps not quite so certain as our previous two, is that
the truth of memory cannot be wholly practical, as pragmatists wish
all truth to be. It seems clear that some of the things I remember are
trivial and without any visible importance for the future, but that my
memory is true (or false) in virtue of a past event, not in virtue of
any future consequences of my belief. The definition of truth as the
correspondence between beliefs and facts seems peculiarly evident in the
case of memory, as against not only the pragmatist definition but also
the idealist definition by means of coherence. These considerations,
however, are taking us away from psychology, to which we must now
return.

It is important not to confuse the two forms of memory which Bergson
distinguishes in the second chapter of his "Matter and Memory,"
namely the sort that consists of habit, and the sort that consists of
independent recollection. He gives the instance of learning a lesson
by heart: when I know it by heart I am said to "remember" it, but this
merely means that I have acquired certain habits; on the other hand,
my recollection of (say) the second time I read the lesson while I was
learning it is the recollection of a unique event, which occurred only
once. The recollection of a unique event cannot, so Bergson contends,
be wholly constituted by habit, and is in fact something radically
different from the memory which is habit. The recollection alone is true
memory. This distinction is vital to the understanding of memory. But
it is not so easy to carry out in practice as it is to draw in theory.
Habit is a very intrusive feature of our mental life, and is often
present where at first sight it seems not to be. There is, for example,
a habit of remembering a unique event. When we have once described the
event, the words we have used easily become habitual. We may even have
used words to describe it to ourselves while it was happening; in that
case, the habit of these words may fulfil the function of Bergson's true
memory, while in reality it is nothing but habit-memory. A gramophone,
by the help of suitable records, might relate to us the incidents of its
past; and people are not so different from gramophones as they like to
believe.

In spite, however, of a difficulty in distinguishing the two forms of
memory in practice, there can be no doubt that both forms exist. I can
set to work now to remember things I never remembered before, such
as what I had to eat for breakfast this morning, and it can hardly be
wholly habit that enables me to do this. It is this sort of occurrence
that constitutes the essence of memory Until we have analysed what
happens in such a case as this, we have not succeeded in understanding
memory.

The sort of memory with which we are here concerned is the sort which is
a form of knowledge. Whether knowledge itself is reducible to habit is
a question to which I shall return in a later lecture; for the present
I am only anxious to point out that, whatever the true analysis of
knowledge may be, knowledge of past occurrences is not proved by
behaviour which is due to past experience. The fact that a man can
recite a poem does not show that he remembers any previous occasion on
which he has recited or read it. Similarly, the performances of animals
in getting out of cages or mazes to which they are accustomed do not
prove that they remember having been in the same situation before.
Arguments in favour of (for example) memory in plants are only arguments
in favour of habit-memory, not of knowledge-memory. Samuel Butler's
arguments in favour of the view that an animal remembers something of
the lives of its ancestors* are, when examined, only arguments in favour
of habit-memory. Semon's two books, mentioned in an earlier lecture, do
not touch knowledge-memory at all closely. They give laws according to
which images of past occurrences come into our minds, but do not discuss
our belief that these images refer to past occurrences, which is what
constitutes knowledge-memory. It is this that is of interest to theory
of knowledge. I shall speak of it as "true" memory, to distinguish it
from mere habit acquired through past experience. Before considering
true memory, it will be well to consider two things which are on the way
towards memory, namely the feeling of familiarity and recognition.

     * See his "Life and Habit and Unconscious Memory."

We often feel that something in our sensible environment is familiar,
without having any definite recollection of previous occasions on which
we have seen it. We have this feeling normally in places where we have
often been before--at home, or in well-known streets. Most people and
animals find it essential to their happiness to spend a good deal of
their time in familiar surroundings, which are especially comforting
when any danger threatens. The feeling of familiarity has all sorts
of degrees, down to the stage where we dimly feel that we have seen a
person before. It is by no means always reliable; almost everybody
has at some time experienced the well-known illusion that all that is
happening now happened before at some time. There are occasions when
familiarity does not attach itself to any definite object, when there is
merely a vague feeling that SOMETHING is familiar. This is illustrated
by Turgenev's "Smoke," where the hero is long puzzled by a haunting
sense that something in his present is recalling something in his past,
and at last traces it to the smell of heliotrope. Whenever the sense of
familiarity occurs without a definite object, it leads us to search the
environment until we are satisfied that we have found the appropriate
object, which leads us to the judgment: "THIS is familiar." I think
we may regard familiarity as a definite feeling, capable of existing
without an object, but normally standing in a specific relation to some
feature of the environment, the relation being that which we express in
words by saying that the feature in question is familiar. The judgment
that what is familiar has been experienced before is a product of
reflection, and is no part of the feeling of familiarity, such as a
horse may be supposed to have when he returns to his stable. Thus
no knowledge as to the past is to be derived from the feeling of
familiarity alone.

A further stage is RECOGNITION. This may be taken in two senses,
the first when a thing not merely feels familiar, but we know it is
such-and-such. We recognize our friend Jones, we know cats and dogs
when we see them, and so on. Here we have a definite influence of past
experience, but not necessarily any actual knowledge of the past. When
we see a cat, we know it is a cat because of previous cats we have
seen, but we do not, as a rule, recollect at the moment any particular
occasion when we have seen a cat. Recognition in this sense does not
necessarily involve more than a habit of association: the kind of object
we are seeing at the moment is associated with the word "cat," or with
an auditory image of purring, or whatever other characteristic we may
happen to recognize in the cat of the moment. We are, of course, in
fact able to judge, when we recognize an object, that we have seen it
before, but this judgment is something over and above recognition in
this first sense, and may very probably be impossible to animals that
nevertheless have the experience of recognition in this first sense of
the word.

There is, however, another sense of the word, in which we mean by
recognition, not knowing the name of a thing or some other property of
it, but knowing that we have seen it before In this sense recognition
does involve knowledge about the Fast. This knowledge is memory in
one sense, though in another it is not. It does not involve a definite
memory of a definite past event, but only the knowledge that something
happening now is similar to something that happened before. It differs
from the sense of familiarity by being cognitive; it is a belief or
judgment, which the sense of familiarity is not. I do not wish to
undertake the analysis of belief at present, since it will be the
subject of the twelfth lecture; for the present I merely wish to
emphasize the fact that recognition, in our second sense, consists in
a belief, which we may express approximately in the words: "This has
existed before."

There are, however, several points in which such an account of
recognition is inadequate. To begin with, it might seem at first sight
more correct to define recognition as "I have seen this before" than
as "this has existed before." We recognize a thing (it may be urged) as
having been in our experience before, whatever that may mean; we do not
recognize it as merely having been in the world before. I am not sure
that there is anything substantial in this point. The definition of "my
experience" is difficult; broadly speaking, it is everything that is
connected with what I am experiencing now by certain links, of which
the various forms of memory are among the most important. Thus, if I
recognize a thing, the occasion of its previous existence in virtue
of which I recognize it forms part of "my experience" by DEFINITION:
recognition will be one of the marks by which my experience is singled
out from the rest of the world. Of course, the words "this has existed
before" are a very inadequate translation of what actually happens when
we form a judgment of recognition, but that is unavoidable: words are
framed to express a level of thought which is by no means primitive,
and are quite incapable of expressing such an elementary occurrence as
recognition. I shall return to what is virtually the same question in
connection with true memory, which raises exactly similar problems.

A second point is that, when we recognize something, it was not in fact
the very same thing, but only something similar, that we experienced on
a former occasion. Suppose the object in question is a friend's face. A
person's face is always changing, and is not exactly the same on any two
occasions. Common sense treats it as one face with varying expressions;
but the varying expressions actually exist, each at its proper time,
while the one face is merely a logical construction. We regard two
objects as the same, for common-sense purposes, when the reaction they
call for is practically the same. Two visual appearances, to both
of which it is appropriate to say: "Hullo, Jones!" are treated as
appearances of one identical object, namely Jones. The name "Jones" is
applicable to both, and it is only reflection that shows us that many
diverse particulars are collected together to form the meaning of the
name "Jones." What we see on any one occasion is not the whole series of
particulars that make up Jones, but only one of them (or a few in quick
succession). On another occasion we see another member of the series,
but it is sufficiently similar to count as the same from the standpoint
of common sense. Accordingly, when we judge "I have seen THIS
before," we judge falsely if "this" is taken as applying to the actual
constituent of the world that we are seeing at the moment. The
word "this" must be interpreted vaguely so as to include anything
sufficiently like what we are seeing at the moment. Here, again, we
shall find a similar point as regards true memory; and in connection
with true memory we will consider the point again. It is sometimes
suggested, by those who favour behaviourist views, that recognition
consists in behaving in the same way when a stimulus is repeated as we
behaved on the first occasion when it occurred. This seems to be the
exact opposite of the truth. The essence of recognition is in the
DIFFERENCE between a repeated stimulus and a new one. On the first
occasion there is no recognition; on the second occasion there is. In
fact, recognition is another instance of the peculiarity of causal laws
in psychology, namely, that the causal unit is not a single event, but
two or more events Habit is the great instance of this, but recognition
is another. A stimulus occurring once has a certain effect; occurring
twice, it has the further effect of recognition. Thus the phenomenon
of recognition has as its cause the two occasions when the stimulus has
occurred; either alone is insufficient. This complexity of causes
in psychology might be connected with Bergson's arguments against
repetition in the mental world. It does not prove that there are no
causal laws in psychology, as Bergson suggests; but it does prove that
the causal laws of psychology are Prima facie very different from those
of physics. On the possibility of explaining away the difference as due
to the peculiarities of nervous tissue I have spoken before, but this
possibility must not be forgotten if we are tempted to draw unwarranted
metaphysical deductions.

True memory, which we must now endeavour to understand, consists of
knowledge of past events, but not of all such knowledge. Some knowledge
of past events, for example what we learn through reading history, is
on a par with the knowledge we can acquire concerning the future: it
is obtained by inference, not (so to speak) spontaneously. There is
a similar distinction in our knowledge of the present: some of it is
obtained through the senses, some in more indirect ways. I know that
there are at this moment a number of people in the streets of New York,
but I do not know this in the immediate way in which I know of the
people whom I see by looking out of my window. It is not easy to state
precisely wherein the difference between these two sorts of knowledge
consists, but it is easy to feel the difference. For the moment, I shall
not stop to analyse it, but shall content myself with saying that, in
this respect, memory resembles the knowledge derived from the senses.
It is immediate, not inferred, not abstract; it differs from perception
mainly by being referred to the past.

In regard to memory, as throughout the analysis of knowledge, there are
two very distinct problems, namely (1) as to the nature of the present
occurrence in knowing; (2) as to the relation of this occurrence to what
is known. When we remember, the knowing is now, while what is known is
in the past. Our two questions are, in the case of memory:

(1) What is the present occurrence when we remember?

(2) What is the relation of this present occurrence to the past event
which is remembered?

Of these two questions, only the first concerns the psychologist; the
second belongs to theory of knowledge. At the same time, if we accept
the vague datum with which we began, to the effect that, in some sense,
there is knowledge of the past, we shall have to find, if we can, such
an account of the present occurrence in remembering as will make it not
impossible for remembering to give us knowledge of the past. For the
present, however, we shall do well to forget the problems concerning
theory of knowledge, and concentrate upon the purely psychological
problem of memory.

Between memory-image and sensation there is an intermediate experience
concerning the immediate past. For example, a sound that we have just
heard is present to us in a way which differs both from the sensation
while we are hearing the sound and from the memory-image of something
heard days or weeks ago. James states that it is this way of
apprehending the immediate past that is "the ORIGINAL of our experience
of pastness, from whence we get the meaning of the term"("Psychology,"
i, p. 604). Everyone knows the experience of noticing (say) that
the clock HAS BEEN striking, when we did not notice it while it was
striking. And when we hear a remark spoken, we are conscious of the
earlier words while the later ones are being uttered, and this retention
feels different from recollection of something definitely past. A
sensation fades gradually, passing by continuous gradations to the
status of an image. This retention of the immediate past in a condition
intermediate between sensation and image may be called "immediate
memory." Everything belonging to it is included with sensation in what
is called the "specious present." The specious present includes elements
at all stages on the journey from sensation to image. It is this fact
that enables us to apprehend such things as movements, or the order of
the words in a spoken sentence. Succession can occur within the specious
present, of which we can distinguish some parts as earlier and others as
later. It is to be supposed that the earliest parts are those that have
faded most from their original force, while the latest parts are those
that retain their full sensational character. At the beginning of a
stimulus we have a sensation; then a gradual transition; and at the
end an image. Sensations while they are fading are called "akoluthic"
sensations.* When the process of fading is completed (which happens very
quickly), we arrive at the image, which is capable of being revived on
subsequent occasions with very little change. True memory, as opposed to
"immediate memory," applies only to events sufficiently distant to
have come to an end of the period of fading. Such events, if they are
represented by anything present, can only be represented by images, not
by those intermediate stages, between sensations and images, which occur
during the period of fading.

     * See Semon, "Die mnemischen Empfindungen," chap. vi.

Immediate memory is important both because it provides experience of
succession, and because it bridges the gulf between sensations and
the images which are their copies. But it is now time to resume the
consideration of true memory.

Suppose you ask me what I ate for breakfast this morning. Suppose,
further, that I have not thought about my breakfast in the meantime, and
that I did not, while I was eating it, put into words what it consisted
of. In this case my recollection will be true memory, not habit-memory.
The process of remembering will consist of calling up images of my
breakfast, which will come to me with a feeling of belief such as
distinguishes memory-images from mere imagination-images. Or sometimes
words may come without the intermediary of images; but in this case
equally the feeling of belief is essential.

Let us omit from our consideration, for the present, the memories
in which words replace images. These are always, I think, really
habit-memories, the memories that use images being the typical true
memories.

Memory-images and imagination-images do not differ in their intrinsic
qualities, so far as we can discover. They differ by the fact that
the images that constitute memories, unlike those that constitute
imagination, are accompanied by a feeling of belief which may be
expressed in the words "this happened." The mere occurrence of images,
without this feeling of belief, constitutes imagination; it is the
element of belief that is the distinctive thing in memory.*

     * For belief of a specific kind, cf. Dorothy Wrinch "On the
     Nature of Memory," "Mind," January, 1920.

There are, if I am not mistaken, at least three different kinds of
belief-feeling, which we may call respectively memory, expectation and
bare assent. In what I call bare assent, there is no time-element in
the feeling of belief, though there may be in the content of what is
believed. If I believe that Caesar landed in Britain in B.C. 55, the
time-determination lies, not in the feeling of belief, but in what is
believed. I do not remember the occurrence, but have the same feeling
towards it as towards the announcement of an eclipse next year. But when
I have seen a flash of lightning and am waiting for the thunder, I
have a belief-feeling analogous to memory, except that it refers to the
future: I have an image of thunder, combined with a feeling which may be
expressed in the words: "this will happen." So, in memory, the pastness
lies, not in the content of what is believed, but in the nature of
the belief-feeling. I might have just the same images and expect their
realization; I might entertain them without any belief, as in reading a
novel; or I might entertain them together with a time-determination, and
give bare assent, as in reading history. I shall return to this subject
in a later lecture, when we come to the analysis of belief. For the
present, I wish to make it clear that a certain special kind of belief
is the distinctive characteristic of memory.


The problem as to whether memory can be explained as habit or
association requires to be considered afresh in connection with the
causes of our remembering something. Let us take again the case of my
being asked what I had for breakfast this morning. In this case the
question leads to my setting to work to recollect. It is a little
strange that the question should instruct me as to what it is that I am
to recall. This has to do with understanding words, which will be the
topic of the next lecture; but something must be said about it now. Our
understanding of the words "breakfast this morning" is a habit, in spite
of the fact that on each fresh day they point to a different occasion.
"This morning" does not, whenever it is used, mean the same thing, as
"John" or "St. Paul's" does; it means a different period of time on
each different day. It follows that the habit which constitutes
our understanding of the words "this morning" is not the habit of
associating the words with a fixed object, but the habit of associating
them with something having a fixed time-relation to our present. This
morning has, to-day, the same time-relation to my present that yesterday
morning had yesterday. In order to understand the phrase "this morning"
it is necessary that we should have a way of feeling time-intervals,
and that this feeling should give what is constant in the meaning of the
words "this morning." This appreciation of time-intervals is, however,
obviously a product of memory, not a presupposition of it. It will be
better, therefore, if we wish to analyse the causation of memory by
something not presupposing memory, to take some other instance than that
of a question about "this morning."

Let us take the case of coming into a familiar room where something has
been changed--say a new picture hung on the wall. We may at first
have only a sense that SOMETHING is unfamiliar, but presently we shall
remember, and say "that picture was not on the wall before." In order to
make the case definite, we will suppose that we were only in the room
on one former occasion. In this case it seems fairly clear what happens.
The other objects in the room are associated, through the former
occasion, with a blank space of wall where now there is a picture. They
call up an image of a blank wall, which clashes with perception of the
picture. The image is associated with the belief-feeling which we found
to be distinctive of memory, since it can neither be abolished nor
harmonized with perception. If the room had remained unchanged, we
might have had only the feeling of familiarity without the definite
remembering; it is the change that drives us from the present to memory
of the past.

We may generalize this instance so as to cover the causes of many
memories. Some present feature of the environment is associated, through
past experiences, with something now absent; this absent something comes
before us as an image, and is contrasted with present sensation. In
cases of this sort, habit (or association) explains why the present
feature of the environment brings up the memory-image, but it does
not explain the memory-belief. Perhaps a more complete analysis could
explain the memory-belief also on lines of association and habit, but
the causes of beliefs are obscure, and we cannot investigate them
yet. For the present we must content ourselves with the fact that the
memory-image can be explained by habit. As regards the memory-belief,
we must, at least provisionally, accept Bergson's view that it cannot be
brought under the head of habit, at any rate when it first occurs, i.e.
when we remember something we never remembered before.

We must now consider somewhat more closely the content of a
memory-belief. The memory-belief confers upon the memory-image something
which we may call "meaning;" it makes us feel that the image points to
an object which existed in the past. In order to deal with this topic
we must consider the verbal expression of the memory-belief. We might
be tempted to put the memory-belief into the words: "Something like
this image occurred." But such words would be very far from an accurate
translation of the simplest kind of memory-belief. "Something like this
image" is a very complicated conception. In the simplest kind of memory
we are not aware of the difference between an image and the sensation
which it copies, which may be called its "prototype." When the image
is before us, we judge rather "this occurred." The image is not
distinguished from the object which existed in the past: the word "this"
covers both, and enables us to have a memory-belief which does not
introduce the complicated notion "something like this."

It might be objected that, if we judge "this occurred" when in fact
"this" is a present image, we judge falsely, and the memory-belief,
so interpreted, becomes deceptive. This, however, would be a mistake,
produced by attempting to give to words a precision which they do not
possess when used by unsophisticated people. It is true that the image
is not absolutely identical with its prototype, and if the word "this"
meant the image to the exclusion of everything else, the judgment "this
occurred" would be false. But identity is a precise conception, and no
word, in ordinary speech, stands for anything precise. Ordinary speech
does not distinguish between identity and close similarity. A word
always applies, not only to one particular, but to a group of associated
particulars, which are not recognized as multiple in common thought or
speech. Thus primitive memory, when it judges that "this occurred," is
vague, but not false.

Vague identity, which is really close similarity, has been a source
of many of the confusions by which philosophy has lived. Of a vague
subject, such as a "this," which is both an image and its prototype,
contradictory predicates are true simultaneously: this existed and does
not exist, since it is a thing remembered, but also this exists and did
not exist, since it is a present image. Hence Bergson's
interpenetration of the present by the past, Hegelian continuity and
identity-in-diversity, and a host of other notions which are thought to
be profound because they are obscure and confused. The contradictions
resulting from confounding image and prototype in memory force us to
precision. But when we become precise, our remembering becomes different
from that of ordinary life, and if we forget this we shall go wrong in
the analysis of ordinary memory.

Vagueness and accuracy are important notions, which it is very necessary
to understand. Both are a matter of degree. All thinking is vague
to some extent, and complete accuracy is a theoretical ideal not
practically attainable. To understand what is meant by accuracy, it will
be well to consider first instruments of measurement, such as a balance
or a thermometer. These are said to be accurate when they give different
results for very slightly different stimuli.* A clinical thermometer
is accurate when it enables us to detect very slight differences in the
temperature of the blood. We may say generally that an instrument
is accurate in proportion as it reacts differently to very slightly
different stimuli. When a small difference of stimulus produces a great
difference of reaction, the instrument is accurate; in the contrary case
it is not.

     * This is a necessary but not a sufficient condition. The
     subject of accuracy and vagueness will be considered again
     in Lecture XIII.

Exactly the same thing applies in defining accuracy of thought
or perception. A musician will respond differently to very minute
differences in playing which would be quite imperceptible to the
ordinary mortal. A negro can see the difference between one negro and
another one is his friend, another his enemy. But to us such different
responses are impossible: we can merely apply the word "negro"
indiscriminately. Accuracy of response in regard to any particular kind
of stimulus is improved by practice. Understanding a language is a
case in point. Few Frenchmen can hear any difference between the sounds
"hall" and "hole," which produce quite different impressions upon us.
The two statements "the hall is full of water" and "the hole is full
of water" call for different responses, and a hearing which cannot
distinguish between them is inaccurate or vague in this respect.

Precision and vagueness in thought, as in perception, depend upon the
degree of difference between responses to more or less similar stimuli.
In the case of thought, the response does not follow immediately upon
the sensational stimulus, but that makes no difference as regards our
present question. Thus to revert to memory: A memory is "vague" when
it is appropriate to many different occurrences: for instance, "I met a
man" is vague, since any man would verify it. A memory is "precise" when
the occurrences that would verify it are narrowly circumscribed: for
instance, "I met Jones" is precise as compared to "I met a man." A
memory is "accurate" when it is both precise and true, i.e. in the above
instance, if it was Jones I met. It is precise even if it is false,
provided some very definite occurrence would have been required to make
it true.

It follows from what has been said that a vague thought has more
likelihood of being true than a precise one. To try and hit an object
with a vague thought is like trying to hit the bull's eye with a lump of
putty: when the putty reaches the target, it flattens out all over it,
and probably covers the bull's eye along with the rest. To try and hit
an object with a precise thought is like trying to hit the bull's
eye with a bullet. The advantage of the precise thought is that it
distinguishes between the bull's eye and the rest of the target. For
example, if the whole target is represented by the fungus family and the
bull's eye by mushrooms, a vague thought which can only hit the target
as a whole is not much use from a culinary point of view. And when I
merely remember that I met a man, my memory may be very inadequate to my
practical requirements, since it may make a great difference whether I
met Brown or Jones. The memory "I met Jones" is relatively precise. It
is accurate if I met Jones, inaccurate if I met Brown, but precise in
either case as against the mere recollection that I met a man.

The distinction between accuracy and precision is however, not
fundamental. We may omit precision from out thoughts and confine
ourselves to the distinction between accuracy and vagueness. We may then
set up the following definitions:

An instrument is "reliable" with respect to a given set of stimuli when
to stimuli which are not relevantly different it gives always responses
which are not relevantly different.

An instrument is a "measure" of a set of stimuli which are serially
ordered when its responses, in all cases where they are relevantly
different, are arranged in a series in the same order.

The "degree of accuracy" of an instrument which is a reliable measurer
is the ratio of the difference of response to the difference of stimulus
in cases where the difference of stimulus is small.* That is to say, if
a small difference of stimulus produces a great difference of response,
the instrument is very accurate; in the contrary case, very inaccurate.

     * Strictly speaking, the limit of this, i.e. the derivative
     of the response with respect to the stimulus.

A mental response is called "vague" in proportion to its lack of
accuracy, or rather precision.

These definitions will be found useful, not only in the case of memory,
but in almost all questions concerned with knowledge.

It should be observed that vague beliefs, so far from being necessarily
false, have a better chance of truth than precise ones, though their
truth is less valuable than that of precise beliefs, since they do not
distinguish between occurrences which may differ in important ways.

The whole of the above discussion of vagueness and accuracy was
occasioned by the attempt to interpret the word "this" when we judge in
verbal memory that "this occurred." The word "this," in such a judgment,
is a vague word, equally applicable to the present memory-image and to
the past occurrence which is its prototype. A vague word is not to be
identified with a general word, though in practice the distinction
may often be blurred. A word is general when it is understood to be
applicable to a number of different objects in virtue of some common
property. A word is vague when it is in fact applicable to a number of
different objects because, in virtue of some common property, they
have not appeared, to the person using the word, to be distinct. I
emphatically do not mean that he has judged them to be identical, but
merely that he has made the same response to them all and has not judged
them to be different. We may compare a vague word to a jelly and
a general word to a heap of shot. Vague words precede judgments
of identity and difference; both general and particular words are
subsequent to such judgments. The word "this" in the primitive
memory-belief is a vague word, not a general word; it covers both the
image and its prototype because the two are not distinguished.*

     * On the vague and the general cf. Ribot: "Evolution of
     General Ideas," Open Court Co., 1899, p. 32: "The sole
     permissible formula is this: Intelligence progresses from
     the indefinite to the definite. If 'indefinite' is taken as
     synonymous with general, it may be said that the particular
     does not appear at the outset, but neither does the general
     in any exact sense: the vague would be more appropriate. In
     other words, no sooner has the intellect progressed beyond
     the moment of perception and of its immediate reproduction
     in memory, than the generic image makes its appearance, i.e.
     a state intermediate between the particular and the general,
     participating in the nature of the one and of the other--a
     confused simplification."

But we have not yet finished our analysis of the memory-belief. The
tense in the belief that "this occurred" is provided by the nature of
the belief-feeling involved in memory; the word "this," as we have seen,
has a vagueness which we have tried to describe. But we must still ask
what we mean by "occurred." The image is, in one sense, occurring now;
and therefore we must find some other sense in which the past event
occurred but the image does not occur.

There are two distinct questions to be asked: (1) What causes us to say
that a thing occurs? (2) What are we feeling when we say this? As to the
first question, in the crude use of the word, which is what concerns us,
memory-images would not be said to occur; they would not be noticed
in themselves, but merely used as signs of the past event. Images are
"merely imaginary"; they have not, in crude thought, the sort of reality
that belongs to outside bodies. Roughly speaking, "real" things would
be those that can cause sensations, those that have correlations of the
sort that constitute physical objects. A thing is said to be "real"
or to "occur" when it fits into a context of such correlations. The
prototype of our memory-image did fit into a physical context, while
our memory-image does not. This causes us to feel that the prototype was
"real," while the image is "imaginary."

But the answer to our second question, namely as to what we are feeling
when we say a thing "occurs" or is "real," must be somewhat different.
We do not, unless we are unusually reflective, think about the presence
or absence of correlations: we merely have different feelings which,
intellectualized, may be represented as expectations of the presence
or absence of correlations. A thing which "feels real" inspires us with
hopes or fears, expectations or curiosities, which are wholly absent
when a thing "feels imaginary." The feeling of reality is a feeling akin
to respect: it belongs PRIMARILY to whatever can do things to us without
our voluntary co-operation. This feeling of reality, related to
the memory-image, and referred to the past by the specific kind of
belief-feeling that is characteristic of memory, seems to be what
constitutes the act of remembering in its pure form.

We may now summarize our analysis of pure memory.

Memory demands (a) an image, (b) a belief in past existence. The belief
may be expressed in the words "this existed."

The belief, like every other, may be analysed into (1) the believing,
(2) what is believed. The believing is a specific feeling or sensation
or complex of sensations, different from expectation or bare assent in
a way that makes the belief refer to the past; the reference to the
past lies in the belief-feeling, not in the content believed. There is
a relation between the belief-feeling and the content, making the
belief-feeling refer to the content, and expressed by saying that the
content is what is believed.

The content believed may or may not be expressed in words. Let us
take first the case when it is not. In that case, if we are merely
remembering that something of which we now have an image occurred,
the content consists of (a) the image, (b) the feeling, analogous
to respect, which we translate by saying that something is "real" as
opposed to "imaginary," (c) a relation between the image and the feeling
of reality, of the sort expressed when we say that the feeling refers
to the image. This content does not contain in itself any
time-determination.

The time-determination lies in the nature of the belief feeling, which
is that called "remembering" or (better) "recollecting." It is only
subsequent reflection upon this reference to the past that makes us
realize the distinction between the image and the event recollected.
When we have made this distinction, we can say that the image "means"
the past event.

The content expressed in words is best represented by the words "the
existence of this," since these words do not involve tense, which
belongs to the belief-feeling, not to the content. Here "this" is
a vague term, covering the memory-image and anything very like it,
including its prototype. "Existence" expresses the feeling of a
"reality" aroused primarily by whatever can have effects upon us without
our voluntary co-operation. The word "of" in the phrase "the existence
of this" represents the relation which subsists between the feeling of
reality and the "this."

This analysis of memory is probably extremely faulty, but I do not know
how to improve it.

NOTE.-When I speak of a FEELING of belief, I use the word "feeling" in
a popular sense, to cover a sensation or an image or a complex of
sensations or images or both; I use this word because I do not wish to
commit myself to any special analysis of the belief-feeling.




LECTURE X. WORDS AND MEANING

The problem with which we shall be concerned in this lecture is the
problem of determining what is the relation called "meaning." The word
"Napoleon," we say, "means" a certain person. In saying this, we are
asserting a relation between the word "Napoleon" and the person so
designated. It is this relation that we must now investigate.

Let us first consider what sort of object a word is when considered
simply as a physical thing, apart from its meaning. To begin with, there
are many instances of a word, namely all the different occasions when it
is employed. Thus a word is not something unique and particular, but a
set of occurrences. If we confine ourselves to spoken words, a word has
two aspects, according as we regard it from the point of view of the
speaker or from that of the hearer. From the point of view of the
speaker, a single instance of the use of a word consists of a certain
set of movements in the throat and mouth, combined with breath. From
the point of view of the hearer, a single instance of the use of a
word consists of a certain series of sounds, each being approximately
represented by a single letter in writing, though in practice a letter
may represent several sounds, or several letters may represent one
sound. The connection between the spoken word and the word as it reaches
the hearer is causal. Let us confine ourselves to the spoken word, which
is the more important for the analysis of what is called "thought."
Then we may say that a single instance of the spoken word consists of
a series of movements, and the word consists of a whole set of such
series, each member of the set being very similar to each other member.
That is to say, any two instances of the word "Napoleon" are very
similar, and each instance consists of a series of movements in the
mouth.

A single word, accordingly, is by no means simple it is a class of
similar series of movements (confining ourselves still to the spoken
word). The degree of similarity required cannot be precisely defined:
a man may pronounce the word "Napoleon" so badly that it can hardly be
determined whether he has really pronounced it or not. The instances
of a word shade off into other movements by imperceptible degrees. And
exactly analogous observations apply to words heard or written or read.
But in what has been said so far we have not even broached the
question of the DEFINITION of a word, since "meaning" is clearly what
distinguishes a word from other sets of similar movements, and "meaning"
remains to be defined.

It is natural to think of the meaning of a word as something
conventional. This, however, is only true with great limitations. A new
word can be added to an existing language by a mere convention, as
is done, for instance, with new scientific terms. But the basis of
a language is not conventional, either from the point of view of the
individual or from that of the community. A child learning to speak is
learning habits and associations which are just as much determined by
the environment as the habit of expecting dogs to bark and cocks to
crow. The community that speaks a language has learnt it, and modified
it by processes almost all of which are not deliberate, but the results
of causes operating according to more or less ascertainable laws. If
we trace any Indo-European language back far enough, we arrive
hypothetically (at any rate according to some authorities) at the stage
when language consisted only of the roots out of which subsequent words
have grown. How these roots acquired their meanings is not known, but a
conventional origin is clearly just as mythical as the social contract
by which Hobbes and Rousseau supposed civil government to have been
established. We can hardly suppose a parliament of hitherto speechless
elders meeting together and agreeing to call a cow a cow and a wolf a
wolf. The association of words with their meanings must have grown up
by some natural process, though at present the nature of the process is
unknown.

Spoken and written words are, of course, not the only way of conveying
meaning. A large part of one of Wundt's two vast volumes on language in
his "Volkerpsychologie" is concerned with gesture-language. Ants appear
to be able to communicate a certain amount of information by means of
their antennae. Probably writing itself, which we now regard as merely
a way of representing speech, was originally an independent language,
as it has remained to this day in China. Writing seems to have consisted
originally of pictures, which gradually became conventionalized, coming
in time to represent syllables, and finally letters on the telephone
principle of "T for Tommy." But it would seem that writing nowhere
began as an attempt to represent speech it began as a direct pictorial
representation of what was to be expressed. The essence of language
lies, not in the use of this or that special means of communication,
but in the employment of fixed associations (however these may have
originated) in order that something now sensible--a spoken word, a
picture, a gesture, or what not--may call up the "idea" of something
else. Whenever this is done, what is now sensible may be called a "sign"
or "symbol," and that of which it is intended to call up the "idea" may
be called its "meaning." This is a rough outline of what constitutes
"meaning." But we must fill in the outline in various ways. And,
since we are concerned with what is called "thought," we must pay more
attention than we otherwise should do to the private as opposed to the
social use of language. Language profoundly affects our thoughts, and
it is this aspect of language that is of most importance to us in our
present inquiry. We are almost more concerned with the internal speech
that is never uttered than we are with the things said out loud to other
people.

When we ask what constitutes meaning, we are not asking what is the
meaning of this or that particular word. The word "Napoleon" means a
certain individual; but we are asking, not who is the individual meant,
but what is the relation of the word to the individual which makes the
one mean the other. But just as it is useful to realize the nature of a
word as part of the physical world, so it is useful to realize the sort
of thing that a word may mean. When we are clear both as to what a word
is in its physical aspect, and as to what sort of thing it can mean, we
are in a better position to discover the relation of the two which is
meaning.

The things that words mean differ more than words do. There are
different sorts of words, distinguished by the grammarians; and there
are logical distinctions, which are connected to some extent, though not
so closely as was formerly supposed, with the grammatical distinctions
of parts of speech. It is easy, however, to be misled by grammar,
particularly if all the languages we know belong to one family. In some
languages, according to some authorities, the distinction of parts of
speech does not exist; in many languages it is widely different from
that to which we are accustomed in the Indo-European languages. These
facts have to be borne in mind if we are to avoid giving metaphysical
importance to mere accidents of our own speech.

In considering what words mean, it is natural to start with proper
names, and we will again take "Napoleon" as our instance. We commonly
imagine, when we use a proper name, that we mean one definite entity,
the particular individual who was called "Napoleon." But what we know
as a person is not simple. There MAY be a single simple ego which was
Napoleon, and remained strictly identical from his birth to his death.
There is no way of proving that this cannot be the case, but there is
also not the slightest reason to suppose that it is the case. Napoleon
as he was empirically known consisted of a series of gradually changing
appearances: first a squalling baby, then a boy, then a slim and
beautiful youth, then a fat and slothful person very magnificently
dressed This series of appearances, and various occurrences having
certain kinds of causal connections with them, constitute Napoleon as
empirically known, and therefore are Napoleon in so far as he forms
part of the experienced world. Napoleon is a complicated series of
occurrences, bound together by causal laws, not, like instances of a
word, by similarities. For although a person changes gradually, and
presents similar appearances on two nearly contemporaneous occasions,
it is not these similarities that constitute the person, as appears from
the "Comedy of Errors" for example.

Thus in the case of a proper name, while the word is a set of similar
series of movements, what it means is a series of occurrences bound
together by causal laws of that special kind that makes the occurrences
taken together constitute what we call one person, or one animal or
thing, in case the name applies to an animal or thing instead of to
a person. Neither the word nor what it names is one of the ultimate
indivisible constituents of the world. In language there is no direct
way of designating one of the ultimate brief existents that go to make
up the collections we call things or persons. If we want to speak of
such existents--which hardly happens except in philosophy--we have to do
it by means of some elaborate phrase, such as "the visual sensation
which occupied the centre of my field of vision at noon on January 1,
1919." Such ultimate simples I call "particulars." Particulars MIGHT
have proper names, and no doubt would have if language had been invented
by scientifically trained observers for purposes of philosophy and
logic. But as language was invented for practical ends, particulars have
remained one and all without a name.

We are not, in practice, much concerned with the actual particulars
that come into our experience in sensation; we are concerned rather
with whole systems to which the particulars belong and of which they
are signs. What we see makes us say "Hullo, there's Jones," and the fact
that what we see is a sign of Jones (which is the case because it is one
of the particulars that make up Jones) is more interesting to us than
the actual particular itself. Hence we give the name "Jones" to the
whole set of particulars, but do not trouble to give separate names to
the separate particulars that make up the set.

Passing on from proper names, we come next to general names, such as
"man," "cat," "triangle." A word such as "man" means a whole class
of such collections of particulars as have proper names. The several
members of the class are assembled together in virtue of some similarity
or common property. All men resemble each other in certain important
respects; hence we want a word which shall be equally applicable to all
of them. We only give proper names to the individuals of a species when
they differ inter se in practically important respects. In other cases
we do not do this. A poker, for instance, is just a poker; we do not
call one "John" and another "Peter."

There is a large class of words, such as "eating," "walking,"
"speaking," which mean a set of similar occurrences. Two instances of
walking have the same name because they resemble each other, whereas
two instances of Jones have the same name because they are causally
connected. In practice, however, it is difficult to make any precise
distinction between a word such as "walking" and a general name such as
"man." One instance of walking cannot be concentrated into an instant:
it is a process in time, in which there is a causal connection between
the earlier and later parts, as between the earlier and later parts
of Jones. Thus an instance of walking differs from an instance of man
solely by the fact that it has a shorter life. There is a notion that an
instance of walking, as compared with Jones, is unsubstantial, but this
seems to be a mistake. We think that Jones walks, and that there could
not be any walking unless there were somebody like Jones to perform
the walking. But it is equally true that there could be no Jones unless
there were something like walking for him to do. The notion that actions
are performed by an agent is liable to the same kind of criticism as
the notion that thinking needs a subject or ego, which we rejected in
Lecture I. To say that it is Jones who is walking is merely to say that
the walking in question is part of the whole series of occurrences which
is Jones. There is no LOGICAL impossibility in walking occurring as an
isolated phenomenon, not forming part of any such series as we call a
"person."

We may therefore class with "eating," "walking," "speaking" words
such as "rain," "sunrise," "lightning," which do not denote what would
commonly be called actions. These words illustrate, incidentally, how
little we can trust to the grammatical distinction of parts of speech,
since the substantive "rain" and the verb "to rain" denote precisely the
same class of meteorological occurrences. The distinction between the
class of objects denoted by such a word and the class of objects denoted
by a general name such as "man," "vegetable," or "planet," is that the
sort of object which is an instance of (say) "lightning" is much simpler
than (say) an individual man. (I am speaking of lightning as a sensible
phenomenon, not as it is described in physics.) The distinction is one
of degree, not of kind. But there is, from the point of view of ordinary
thought, a great difference between a process which, like a flash of
lightning, can be wholly comprised within one specious present and a
process which, like the life of a man, has to be pieced together by
observation and memory and the apprehension of causal connections.
We may say broadly, therefore, that a word of the kind we have been
discussing denotes a set of similar occurrences, each (as a rule) much
more brief and less complex than a person or thing. Words themselves, as
we have seen, are sets of similar occurrences of this kind. Thus there
is more logical affinity between a word and what it means in the case of
words of our present sort than in any other case.

There is no very great difference between such words as we have just
been considering and words denoting qualities, such as "white" or
"round." The chief difference is that words of this latter sort do not
denote processes, however brief, but static features of the world. Snow
falls, and is white; the falling is a process, the whiteness is not.
Whether there is a universal, called "whiteness," or whether white
things are to be defined as those having a certain kind of similarity to
a standard thing, say freshly fallen snow, is a question which need
not concern us, and which I believe to be strictly insoluble. For our
purposes, we may take the word "white" as denoting a certain set of
similar particulars or collections of particulars, the similarity being
in respect of a static quality, not of a process.

From the logical point of view, a very important class of words
are those that express relations, such as "in," "above," "before,"
"greater," and so on. The meaning of one of these words differs very
fundamentally from the meaning of one of any of our previous classes,
being more abstract and logically simpler than any of them. If our
business were logic, we should have to spend much time on these words.
But as it is psychology that concerns us, we will merely note their
special character and pass on, since the logical classification of words
is not our main business.

We will consider next the question what is implied by saying that a
person "understands" a word, in the sense in which one understands
a word in one's own language, but not in a language of which one is
ignorant. We may say that a person understands a word when (a) suitable
circumstances make him use it, (b) the hearing of it causes suitable
behaviour in him. We may call these two active and passive understanding
respectively. Dogs often have passive understanding of some words, but
not active understanding, since they cannot use words.

It is not necessary, in order that a man should "understand" a word,
that he should "know what it means," in the sense of being able to say
"this word means so-and-so." Understanding words does not consist in
knowing their dictionary definitions, or in being able to specify the
objects to which they are appropriate. Such understanding as this may
belong to lexicographers and students, but not to ordinary mortals
in ordinary life. Understanding language is more like understanding
cricket*: it is a matter of habits, acquired in oneself and rightly
presumed in others. To say that a word has a meaning is not to say that
those who use the word correctly have ever thought out what the meaning
is: the use of the word comes first, and the meaning is to be distilled
out of it by observation and analysis. Moreover, the meaning of a word
is not absolutely definite: there is always a greater or less degree of
vagueness. The meaning is an area, like a target: it may have a bull's
eye, but the outlying parts of the target are still more or less within
the meaning, in a gradually diminishing degree as we travel further from
the bull's eye. As language grows more precise, there is less and less
of the target outside the bull's eye, and the bull's eye itself grows
smaller and smaller; but the bull's eye never shrinks to a point, and
there is always a doubtful region, however small, surrounding it.**

     * This point of view, extended to the analysis of "thought"
     is urged with great force by J. B. Watson, both in his
     "Behavior," and in "Psychology from the Standpoint of a
     Behaviorist" (Lippincott. 1919), chap. ix.

     ** On the understanding of words, a very admirable little
     book is Ribot's "Evolution of General Ideas," Open Court
     Co., 1899. Ribot says (p. 131): "We learn to understand a
     concept as we learn to walk, dance, fence or play a musical
     instrument: it is a habit, i.e. an organized memory. General
     terms cover an organized, latent knowledge which is the
     hidden capital without which we should be in a state of
     bankruptcy, manipulating false money or paper of no value.
     General ideas are habits in the intellectual order."

A word is used "correctly" when the average hearer will be affected
by it in the way intended. This is a psychological, not a literary,
definition of "correctness." The literary definition would substitute,
for the average hearer, a person of high education living a long time
ago; the purpose of this definition is to make it difficult to speak or
write correctly.

The relation of a word to its meaning is of the nature of a causal law
governing our use of the word and our actions when we hear it used.
There is no more reason why a person who uses a word correctly should
be able to tell what it means than there is why a planet which is moving
correctly should know Kepler's laws.

To illustrate what is meant by "understanding" words and sentences, let
us take instances of various situations.

Suppose you are walking in London with an absent-minded friend, and
while crossing a street you say, "Look out, there's a motor coming."
He will glance round and jump aside without the need of any "mental"
intermediary. There need be no "ideas," but only a stiffening of the
muscles, followed quickly by action. He "understands" the words, because
he does the right thing. Such "understanding" may be taken to belong to
the nerves and brain, being habits which they have acquired while the
language was being learnt. Thus understanding in this sense may be
reduced to mere physiological causal laws.

If you say the same thing to a Frenchman with a slight knowledge of
English he will go through some inner speech which may be represented by
"Que dit-il? Ah, oui, une automobile!" After this, the rest follows as
with the Englishman. Watson would contend that the inner speech must be
incipiently pronounced; we should argue that it MIGHT be merely imaged.
But this point is not important in the present connection.

If you say the same thing to a child who does not yet know the word
"motor," but does know the other words you are using, you produce a
feeling of anxiety and doubt you will have to point and say, "There,
that's a motor." After that the child will roughly understand the word
"motor," though he may include trains and steam-rollers If this is the
first time the child has heard the word "motor," he may for a long time
continue to recall this scene when he hears the word.

So far we have found four ways of understanding words:

(1) On suitable occasions you use the word properly.

(2) When you hear it you act appropriately.

(3) You associate the word with another word (say in a different
language) which has the appropriate effect on behaviour.

(4) When the word is being first learnt, you may associate it with an
object, which is what it "means," or a representative of various objects
that it "means."

In the fourth case, the word acquires, through association, some of the
same causal efficacy as the object. The word "motor" can make you
leap aside, just as the motor can, but it cannot break your bones. The
effects which a word can share with its object are those which proceed
according to laws other than the general laws of physics, i.e. those
which, according to our terminology, involve vital movements as opposed
to merely mechanical movements. The effects of a word that we understand
are always mnemic phenomena in the sense explained in Lecture IV, in
so far as they are identical with, or similar to, the effects which the
object itself might have.

So far, all the uses of words that we have considered can be accounted
for on the lines of behaviourism.

But so far we have only considered what may be called the
"demonstrative" use of language, to point out some feature in the
present environment. This is only one of the ways in which language
may be used. There are also its narrative and imaginative uses, as
in history and novels. Let us take as an instance the telling of some
remembered event.

We spoke a moment ago of a child who hears the word "motor" for
the first time when crossing a street along which a motor-car is
approaching. On a later occasion, we will suppose, the child remembers
the incident and relates it to someone else. In this case, both the
active and passive understanding of words is different from what it is
when words are used demonstratively. The child is not seeing a motor,
but only remembering one; the hearer does not look round in expectation
of seeing a motor coming, but "understands" that a motor came at some
earlier time. The whole of this occurrence is much more difficult to
account for on behaviourist lines. It is clear that, in so far as the
child is genuinely remembering, he has a picture of the past occurrence,
and his words are chosen so as to describe the picture; and in so far
as the hearer is genuinely apprehending what is said, the hearer is
acquiring a picture more or less like that of the child. It is true that
this process may be telescoped through the operation of the word-habit.
The child may not genuinely remember the incident, but only have the
habit of the appropriate words, as in the case of a poem which we know
by heart, though we cannot remember learning it. And the hearer also
may only pay attention to the words, and not call up any corresponding
picture. But it is, nevertheless, the possibility of a memory-image in
the child and an imagination-image in the hearer that makes the essence
of the narrative "meaning" of the words. In so far as this is absent,
the words are mere counters, capable of meaning, but not at the moment
possessing it.

Yet this might perhaps be regarded as something of an overstatement. The
words alone, without the use of images, may cause appropriate emotions
and appropriate behaviour. The words have been used in an environment
which produced certain emotions; by a telescoped process, the words
alone are now capable of producing similar emotions. On these lines it
might be sought to show that images are unnecessary. I do not believe,
however, that we could account on these lines for the entirely different
response produced by a narrative and by a description of present facts.
Images, as contrasted with sensations, are the response expected during
a narrative; it is understood that present action is not called
for. Thus it seems that we must maintain our distinction words used
demonstratively describe and are intended to lead to sensations, while
the same words used in narrative describe and are only intended to lead
to images.

We have thus, in addition to our four previous ways in which words can
mean, two new ways, namely the way of memory and the way of imagination.
That is to say:

(5) Words may be used to describe or recall a memory-image: to describe
it when it already exists, or to recall it when the words exist as a
habit and are known to be descriptive of some past experience.

(6) Words may be used to describe or create an imagination-image: to
describe it, for example, in the case of a poet or novelist, or to
create it in the ordinary case for giving information-though, in the
latter case, it is intended that the imagination-image, when created,
shall be accompanied by belief that something of the sort occurred.

These two ways of using words, including their occurrence in inner
speech, may be spoken of together as the use of words in "thinking."
If we are right, the use of words in thinking depends, at least in its
origin, upon images, and cannot be fully dealt with on behaviourist
lines. And this is really the most essential function of words, namely
that, originally through their connection with images, they bring us
into touch with what is remote in time or space. When they operate
without the medium of images, this seems to be a telescoped process.
Thus the problem of the meaning of words is brought into connection with
the problem of the meaning of images.

To understand the function that words perform in what is called
"thinking," we must understand both the causes and the effects of their
occurrence. The causes of the occurrence of words require somewhat
different treatment according as the object designated by the word is
sensibly present or absent. When the object is present, it may itself
be taken as the cause of the word, through association. But when it is
absent there is more difficulty in obtaining a behaviourist theory of
the occurrence of the word. The language-habit consists not merely
in the use of words demonstratively, but also in their use to express
narrative or desire. Professor Watson, in his account of the acquisition
of the language-habit, pays very little attention to the use of words in
narrative and desire. He says ("Behavior," pp. 329-330):

"The stimulus (object) to which the child often responds, a box, e.g. by
movements such as opening and closing and putting objects into it, may
serve to illustrate our argument. The nurse, observing that the child
reacts with his hands, feet, etc., to the box, begins to say 'box' when
the child is handed the box, 'open box' when the child opens it, 'close
box' when he closes it, and 'put doll in box' when that act is executed.
This is repeated over and over again. In the process of time it comes
about that without any other stimulus than that of the box which
originally called out the bodily habits, he begins to say 'box' when he
sees it, 'open box' when he opens it, etc. The visible box now becomes
a stimulus capable of releasing either the bodily habits or the
word-habit, i.e. development has brought about two things: (1) a series
of functional connections among arcs which run from visual receptor to
muscles of throat, and (2) a series of already earlier connected arcs
which run from the same receptor to the bodily muscles.... The object
meets the child's vision. He runs to it and tries to reach it and says
'box.'... Finally the word is uttered without the movement of going
towards the box being executed.... Habits are formed of going to the
box when the arms are full of toys. The child has been taught to deposit
them there. When his arms are laden with toys and no box is there, the
word-habit arises and he calls 'box'; it is handed to him, and he opens
it and deposits the toys therein. This roughly marks what we would call
the genesis of a true language-habit."(pp. 329-330).*

     * Just the same account of language is given in Professor
     Watson's more recent book (reference above).

We need not linger over what is said in the above passage as to the use
of the word "box" in the presence of the box. But as to its use in the
absence of the box, there is only one brief sentence, namely: "When his
arms are laden with toys and no box is there, the word-habit arises and
he calls 'box.'" This is inadequate as it stands, since the habit has
been to use the word when the box is present, and we have to explain its
extension to cases in which the box is absent.

Having admitted images, we may say that the word "box," in the absence
of the box, is caused by an image of the box. This may or may not
be true--in fact, it is true in some cases but not in others. Even,
however, if it were true in all cases, it would only slightly shift our
problem: we should now have to ask what causes an image of the box to
arise. We might be inclined to say that desire for the box is the cause.
But when this view is investigated, it is found that it compels us to
suppose that the box can be desired without the child's having either an
image of the box or the word "box." This will require a theory of desire
which may be, and I think is, in the main true, but which removes desire
from among things that actually occur, and makes it merely a convenient
fiction, like force in mechanics.* With such a view, desire is no longer
a true cause, but merely a short way of describing certain processes.

     * See Lecture III, above.

In order to explain the occurrence of either the word or the image
in the absence of the box, we have to assume that there is something,
either in the environment or in our own sensations, which has frequently
occurred at about the same time as the word "box." One of the laws which
distinguish psychology (or nerve-physiology?) from physics is the
law that, when two things have frequently existed in close temporal
contiguity, either comes in time to cause the other.* This is the basis
both of habit and of association. Thus, in our case, the arms full of
toys have frequently been followed quickly by the box, and the box in
turn by the word "box." The box itself is subject to physical laws, and
does not tend to be caused by the arms full of toys, however often it
may in the past have followed them--always provided that, in the case in
question, its physical position is such that voluntary movements cannot
lead to it. But the word "box" and the image of the box are subject to
the law of habit; hence it is possible for either to be caused by the
arms full of toys. And we may lay it down generally that, whenever we
use a word, either aloud or in inner speech, there is some sensation
or image (either of which may be itself a word) which has frequently
occurred at about the same time as the word, and now, through habit,
causes the word. It follows that the law of habit is adequate to account
for the use of words in the absence of their objects; moreover, it would
be adequate even without introducing images. Although, therefore, images
seem undeniable, we cannot derive an additional argument in their favour
from the use of words, which could, theoretically, be explained without
introducing images.

     *For a more exact statement of this law, with the
     limitations suggested by experiment, see A. Wohlgemuth, "On
     Memory and the Direction of Associations," "British Journal
     of Psychology," vol. v, part iv (March, 1913).

When we understand a word, there is a reciprocal association between
it and the images of what it "means." Images may cause us to use words
which mean them, and these words, heard or read, may in turn cause the
appropriate images. Thus speech is a means of producing in our hearers
the images which are in us. Also, by a telescoped process, words come in
time to produce directly the effects which would have been produced
by the images with which they were associated. The general law of
telescoped processes is that, if A causes B and B causes C, it will
happen in time that A will cause C directly, without the intermediary
of B. This is a characteristic of psychological and neural causation.
In virtue of this law, the effects of images upon our actions come to
be produced by words, even when the words do not call up appropriate
images. The more familiar we are with words, the more our "thinking"
goes on in words instead of images. We may, for example, be able to
describe a person's appearance correctly without having at any time had
any image of him, provided, when we saw him, we thought of words which
fitted him; the words alone may remain with us as a habit, and enable
us to speak as if we could recall a visual image of the man. In this and
other ways the understanding of a word often comes to be quite free from
imagery; but in first learning the use of language it would seem that
imagery always plays a very important part.

Images as well as words may be said to have "meaning"; indeed, the
meaning of images seems more primitive than the meaning of words. What
we call (say) an image of St. Paul's may be said to "mean" St. Paul's.
But it is not at all easy to say exactly what constitutes the meaning of
an image. A memory-image of a particular occurrence, when accompanied
by a memory-belief, may be said to mean the occurrence of which it is an
image. But most actual images do not have this degree of definiteness.
If we call up an image of a dog, we are very likely to have a vague
image, which is not representative of some one special dog, but of dogs
in general. When we call up an image of a friend's face, we are not
likely to reproduce the expression he had on some one particular
occasion, but rather a compromise expression derived from many
occasions. And there is hardly any limit to the vagueness of which
images are capable. In such cases, the meaning of the image, if defined
by relation to the prototype, is vague: there is not one definite
prototype, but a number, none of which is copied exactly.*

     * Cf. Semon, Mnemische Empfindungen, chap. xvi, especially
     pp. 301-308.

There is, however, another way of approaching the meaning of images,
namely through their causal efficacy. What is called an image "of"
some definite object, say St. Paul's, has some of the effects which the
object would have. This applies especially to the effects that depend
upon association. The emotional effects, also, are often similar:
images may stimulate desire almost as strongly as do the objects they
represent. And conversely desire may cause images*: a hungry man will
have images of food, and so on. In all these ways the causal laws
concerning images are connected with the causal laws concerning the
objects which the images "mean." An image may thus come to fulfil the
function of a general idea. The vague image of a dog, which we spoke of
a moment ago, will have effects which are only connected with dogs in
general, not the more special effects which would be produced by some
dogs but not by others. Berkeley and Hume, in their attack on general
ideas, do not allow for the vagueness of images: they assume that every
image has the definiteness that a physical object would have This is not
the case, and a vague image may well have a meaning which is general.

     * This phrase is in need of interpretation, as appears from
     the analysis of desire. But the reader can easily supply the
     interpretation for himself.

In order to define the "meaning" of an image, we have to take account
both of its resemblance to one or more prototypes, and of its causal
efficacy. If there were such a thing as a pure imagination-image,
without any prototype whatever, it would be destitute of meaning. But
according to Hume's principle, the simple elements in an image,
at least, are derived from prototypes-except possibly in very rare
exceptional cases. Often, in such instances as our image of a friend's
face or of a nondescript dog, an image is not derived from one
prototype, but from many; when this happens, the image is vague, and
blurs the features in which the various prototypes differ. To arrive
at the meaning of the image in such a case, we observe that there are
certain respects, notably associations, in which the effects of images
resemble those of their prototypes. If we find, in a given case, that
our vague image, say, of a nondescript dog, has those associative
effects which all dogs would have, but not those belonging to any
special dog or kind of dog, we may say that our image means "dog" in
general. If it has all the associations appropriate to spaniels but
no others, we shall say it means "spaniel"; while if it has all the
associations appropriate to one particular dog, it will mean that dog,
however vague it may be as a picture. The meaning of an image, according
to this analysis, is constituted by a combination of likeness and
associations. It is not a sharp or definite conception, and in many
cases it will be impossible to decide with any certainty what an image
means. I think this lies in the nature of things, and not in defective
analysis.

We may give somewhat more precision to the above account of the meaning
of images, and extend it to meaning in general. We find sometimes that,
IN MNEMIC CAUSATION, an image or word, as stimulus, has the same effect
(or very nearly the same effect) as would belong to some object, say,
a certain dog. In that case we say that the image or word means that
object. In other cases the mnemic effects are not all those of one
object, but only those shared by objects of a certain kind, e.g. by all
dogs. In this case the meaning of the image or word is general: it means
the whole kind. Generality and particularity are a matter of degree. If
two particulars differ sufficiently little, their mnemic effects will be
the same; therefore no image or word can mean the one as opposed to the
other; this sets a bound to the particularity of meaning. On the other
hand, the mnemic effects of a number of sufficiently dissimilar objects
will have nothing discoverable in common; hence a word which aims at
complete generality, such as "entity" for example, will have to be
devoid of mnemic effects, and therefore of meaning. In practice, this is
not the case: such words have VERBAL associations, the learning of which
constitutes the study of metaphysics.

The meaning of a word, unlike that of an image, is wholly constituted
by mnemic causal laws, and not in any degree by likeness (except in
exceptional cases). The word "dog" bears no resemblance to a dog, but
its effects, like those of an image of a dog, resemble the effects of an
actual dog in certain respects. It is much easier to say definitely
what a word means than what an image means, since words, however they
originated, have been framed in later times for the purpose of having
meaning, and men have been engaged for ages in giving increased
precision to the meanings of words. But although it is easier to
say what a word means than what an image means, the relation which
constitutes meaning is much the same in both cases. A word, like an
image, has the same associations as its meaning has. In addition to
other associations, it is associated with images of its meaning, so that
the word tends to call up the image and the image tends to call up the
word., But this association is not essential to the intelligent use of
words. If a word has the right associations with other objects, we shall
be able to use it correctly, and understand its use by others, even if
it evokes no image. The theoretical understanding of words involves only
the power of associating them correctly with other words; the practical
understanding involves associations with other bodily movements.

The use of words is, of course, primarily social, for the purpose of
suggesting to others ideas which we entertain or at least wish them to
entertain. But the aspect of words that specially concerns us is their
power of promoting our own thought. Almost all higher intellectual
activity is a matter of words, to the nearly total exclusion of
everything else. The advantages of words for purposes of thought are so
great that I should never end if I were to enumerate them. But a few of
them deserve to be mentioned.

In the first place, there is no difficulty in producing a word, whereas
an image cannot always be brought into existence at will, and when it
comes it often contains much irrelevant detail. In the second place,
much of our thinking is concerned with abstract matters which do not
readily lend themselves to imagery, and are apt to be falsely conceived
if we insist upon finding images that may be supposed to represent them.
The word is always concrete and sensible, however abstract its
meaning may be, and thus by the help of words we are able to dwell on
abstractions in a way which would otherwise be impossible. In the third
place, two instances of the same word are so similar that neither has
associations not capable of being shared by the other. Two instances of
the word "dog" are much more alike than (say) a pug and a great dane;
hence the word "dog" makes it much easier to think about dogs in
general. When a number of objects have a common property which is
important but not obvious, the invention of a name for the common
property helps us to remember it and to think of the whole set of
objects that possess it. But it is unnecessary to prolong the catalogue
of the uses of language in thought.

At the same time, it is possible to conduct rudimentary thought by
means of images, and it is important, sometimes, to check purely verbal
thought by reference to what it means. In philosophy especially the
tyranny of traditional words is dangerous, and we have to be on our
guard against assuming that grammar is the key to metaphysics, or that
the structure of a sentence corresponds at all accurately with the
structure of the fact that it asserts. Sayce maintained that all
European philosophy since Aristotle has been dominated by the fact that
the philosophers spoke Indo-European languages, and therefore supposed
the world, like the sentences they were used to, necessarily divisible
into subjects and predicates. When we come to the consideration of truth
and falsehood, we shall see how necessary it is to avoid assuming too
close a parallelism between facts and the sentences which assert them.
Against such errors, the only safeguard is to be able, once in a way, to
discard words for a moment and contemplate facts more directly through
images. Most serious advances in philosophic thought result from some
such comparatively direct contemplation of facts. But the outcome has
to be expressed in words if it is to be communicable. Those who have
a relatively direct vision of facts are often incapable of translating
their vision into words, while those who possess the words have
usually lost the vision. It is partly for this reason that the highest
philosophical capacity is so rare: it requires a combination of vision
with abstract words which is hard to achieve, and too quickly lost in
the few who have for a moment achieved it.




LECTURE XI. GENERAL IDEAS AND THOUGHT

It is said to be one of the merits of the human mind that it is capable
of framing abstract ideas, and of conducting nonsensational thought.
In this it is supposed to differ from the mind of animals. From Plato
onward the "idea" has played a great part in the systems of idealizing
philosophers. The "idea" has been, in their hands, always something
noble and abstract, the apprehension and use of which by man confers
upon him a quite special dignity.

The thing we have to consider to-day is this: seeing that there
certainly are words of which the meaning is abstract, and seeing that we
can use these words intelligently, what must be assumed or inferred, or
what can be discovered by observation, in the way of mental content to
account for the intelligent use of abstract words?

Taken as a problem in logic, the answer is, of course, that absolutely
nothing in the way of abstract mental content is inferable from the
mere fact that we can use intelligently words of which the meaning
is abstract. It is clear that a sufficiently ingenious person could
manufacture a machine moved by olfactory stimuli which, whenever a dog
appeared in its neighbourhood, would say, "There is a dog," and when
a cat appeared would throw stones at it. The act of saying "There is a
dog," and the act of throwing stones, would in such a case be equally
mechanical. Correct speech does not of itself afford any better evidence
of mental content than the performance of any other set of biologically
useful movements, such as those of flight or combat. All that is
inferable from language is that two instances of a universal, even when
they differ very greatly, may cause the utterance of two instances
of the same word which only differ very slightly. As we saw in the
preceding lecture, the word "dog" is useful, partly, because two
instances of this word are much more similar than (say) a pug and a
great dane. The use of words is thus a method of substituting for two
particulars which differ widely, in spite of being instances of the same
universal, two other particulars which differ very little, and which
are also instances of a universal, namely the name of the previous
universal. Thus, so far as logic is concerned, we are entirely free to
adopt any theory as to general ideas which empirical observation may
recommend.

Berkeley and Hume made a vigorous onslaught on "abstract ideas." They
meant by an idea approximately what we should call an image. Locke
having maintained that he could form an idea of triangle in general,
without deciding what sort of triangle it was to be, Berkeley contended
that this was impossible. He says:

"Whether others, have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas,
they best can tell: for myself, I dare be confident I have it not. I
find, indeed, I have indeed a faculty of imagining, or representing to
myself, the ideas of those particular things I have perceived, and of
variously compounding and dividing them. I can imagine a man with two
heads, or the upper parts of a man joined to the body of a horse. I
can consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by itself abstracted or
separated from the rest of the body. But, then, whatever hand or eye
I imagine, it must have some particular shape and colour. Likewise the
idea of a man that I frame to myself must be either of a white, or a
black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or
a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the
abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me to
form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and
which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the
like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. To be
plain, I own myself able to abstract in one sense, as when I consider
some particular parts of qualities separated from others, with which,
though they are united in some object, yet it is possible they may
really exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract from one
another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible
should exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion, by
abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid--which last are
the two proper acceptations of ABSTRACTION. And there is ground to think
most men will acknowledge themselves to be in my case. The generality of
men which are simple and illiterate never pretend to ABSTRACT NOTIONS.
It is said they are difficult and not to be attained without pains and
study; we may therefore reasonably conclude that, if such there be, they
are confined only to the learned.

"I proceed to examine what can be alleged in defence of the doctrine of
abstraction, and try if I can discover what it is that inclines the men
of speculation to embrace an opinion so remote from common sense as that
seems to be. There has been a late excellent and deservedly esteemed
philosopher who, no doubt, has given it very much countenance, by
seeming to think the having abstract general ideas is what puts the
widest difference in point of understanding betwixt man and beast.
'The having of general ideas,' saith he, 'is that which puts a perfect
distinction betwixt man and brutes, and is an excellency which the
faculties of brutes do by no means attain unto. For, it is evident
we observe no footsteps in them of making use of general signs for
universal ideas; from which we have reason to imagine that they have not
the faculty of abstracting, or making general ideas, since they have
no use of words or any other general signs.' And a little after:
'Therefore, I think, we may suppose that it is in this that the species
of brutes are discriminated from men, and it is that proper difference
wherein they are wholly separated, and which at last widens to so wide a
distance. For, if they have any ideas at all, and are not bare machines
(as some would have them), we cannot deny them to have some reason. It
seems as evident to me that they do, some of them, in certain instances
reason as that they have sense; but it is only in particular ideas, just
as they receive them from their senses. They are the best of them tied
up within those narrow bounds, and have not (as I think) the faculty
to enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.* ("Essay on Human
Understanding," Bk. II, chap. xi, paragraphs 10 and 11.) I readily agree
with this learned author, that the faculties of brutes can by no means
attain to abstraction. But, then, if this be made the distinguishing
property of that sort of animals, I fear a great many of those that
pass for men must be reckoned into their number. The reason that is here
assigned why we have no grounds to think brutes have abstract general
ideas is, that we observe in them no use of words or any other general
signs; which is built on this supposition-that the making use of words
implies the having general ideas. From which it follows that men who use
language are able to abstract or generalize their ideas. That this is
the sense and arguing of the author will further appear by his answering
the question he in another place puts: 'Since all things that exist are
only particulars, how come we by general terms?' His answer is: 'Words
become general by being made the signs of general ideas.' ("Essay on
Human Understanding," Bk. III, chap. III, paragraph 6.) But it seems
that a word becomes general by being made the sign, not of an abstract
general idea, but of several particular ideas, any one of which it
indifferently suggests to the mind. For example, when it is said 'the
change of motion is proportional to the impressed force,' or that
'whatever has extension is divisible,' these propositions are to be
understood of motion and extension in general; and nevertheless it will
not follow that they suggest to my thoughts an idea of motion without
a body moved, or any determinate direction and velocity, or that I must
conceive an abstract general idea of extension, which is neither line,
surface, nor solid, neither great nor small, black, white, nor red,
nor of any other determinate colour. It is only implied that
whatever particular motion I consider, whether it be swift or slow,
perpendicular, horizontal, or oblique, or in whatever object, the axiom
concerning it holds equally true. As does the other of every particular
extension, it matters not whether line, surface, or solid, whether of
this or that magnitude or figure.

"By observing how ideas become general, we may the better judge how
words are made so. And here it is to be noted that I do not deny
absolutely there are general ideas, but only that there are any ABSTRACT
general ideas; for, in the passages we have quoted wherein there is
mention of general ideas, it is always supposed that they are formed by
abstraction, after the manner set forth in sections 8 and 9. Now, if
we will annex a meaning to our words, and speak only of what we can
conceive, I believe we shall acknowledge that an idea which, considered
in itself, is particular, becomes general by being made to represent
or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort. To make this
plain by an example, suppose a geometrician is demonstrating the method
of cutting a line in two equal parts. He draws, for instance, a black
line of an inch in length: this, which in itself is a particular line,
is nevertheless with regard to its signification general, since, as it
is there used, it represents all particular lines whatsoever; so that
what is demonstrated of it is demonstrated of all lines, or, in other
words, of a line in general. And, as THAT PARTICULAR LINE becomes
general by being made a sign, so the NAME 'line,' which taken absolutely
is particular, by being a sign is made general. And as the former owes
its generality not to its being the sign of an abstract or general line,
but of all particular right lines that may possibly exist, so the latter
must be thought to derive its generality from the same cause, namely,
the various particular lines which it indifferently denotes." *

     * Introduction to "A Treatise concerning the Principles of
     Human Knowledge," paragraphs 10, 11, and 12.

Berkeley's view in the above passage, which is essentially the same as
Hume's, does not wholly agree with modern psychology, although it comes
nearer to agreement than does the view of those who believe that there
are in the mind single contents which can be called abstract ideas. The
way in which Berkeley's view is inadequate is chiefly in the fact that
images are as a rule not of one definite prototype, but of a number of
related similar prototypes. On this subject Semon has written well.
In "Die Mneme," pp. 217 ff., discussing the effect of repeated similar
stimuli in producing and modifying our images, he says: "We choose a
case of mnemic excitement whose existence we can perceive for ourselves
by introspection, and seek to ekphore the bodily picture of our nearest
relation in his absence, and have thus a pure mnemic excitement before
us. At first it may seem to us that a determinate quite concrete picture
becomes manifest in us, but just when we are concerned with a person
with whom we are in constant contact, we shall find that the ekphored
picture has something so to speak generalized. It is something like
those American photographs which seek to display what is general about a
type by combining a great number of photographs of different heads over
each other on one plate. In our opinion, the generalizations happen by
the homophonic working of different pictures of the same face which we
have come across in the most different conditions and situations, once
pale, once reddened, once cheerful, once earnest, once in this
light, and once in that. As soon as we do not let the whole series
of repetitions resound in us uniformly, but give our attention to one
particular moment out of the many... this particular mnemic stimulus at
once overbalances its simultaneously roused predecessors and successors,
and we perceive the face in question with concrete definiteness in that
particular situation." A little later he says: "The result is--at least
in man, but probably also in the higher animals--the development of a
sort of PHYSIOLOGICAL abstraction. Mnemic homophony gives us, without
the addition of other processes of thought, a picture of our friend
X which is in a certain sense abstract, not the concrete in any one
situation, but X cut loose from any particular point of time. If the
circle of ekphored engrams is drawn even more widely, abstract pictures
of a higher order appear: for instance, a white man or a negro. In my
opinion, the first form of abstract concepts in general is based upon
such abstract pictures. The physiological abstraction which takes
place in the above described manner is a predecessor of purely logical
abstraction. It is by no means a monopoly of the human race, but shows
itself in various ways also among the more highly organized animals."
The same subject is treated in more detail in Chapter xvi of "Die
mnemischen Empfindungen," but what is said there adds nothing vital to
what is contained in the above quotations.

It is necessary, however, to distinguish between the vague and the
general. So long as we are content with Semon's composite image, we MAY
get no farther than the vague. The question whether this image takes us
to the general or not depends, I think, upon the question whether, in
addition to the generalized image, we have also particular images
of some of the instances out of which it is compounded. Suppose, for
example, that on a number of occasions you had seen one negro, and
that you did not know whether this one was the same or different on
the different occasions. Suppose that in the end you had an abstract
memory-image of the different appearances presented by the negro on
different occasions, but no memory-image of any one of the single
appearances. In that case your image would be vague. If, on the other
hand, you have, in addition to the generalized image, particular images
of the several appearances, sufficiently clear to be recognized as
different, and as instances of the generalized picture, you will then
not feel the generalized picture to be adequate to any one particular
appearance, and you will be able to make it function as a general
idea rather than a vague idea. If this view is correct, no new general
content needs to be added to the generalized image. What needs to be
added is particular images compared and contrasted with the generalized
image. So far as I can judge by introspection, this does occur in
practice. Take for example Semon's instance of a friend's face. Unless
we make some special effort of recollection, the face is likely to come
before us with an average expression, very blurred and vague, but we can
at will recall how our friend looked on some special occasion when he
was pleased or angry or unhappy, and this enables us to realize the
generalized character of the vague image.

There is, however, another way of distinguishing between the vague, the
particular and the general, and this is not by their content, but by
the reaction which they produce. A word, for example, may be said to be
vague when it is applicable to a number of different individuals, but to
each as individuals; the name Smith, for example, is vague: it is always
meant to apply to one man, but there are many men to each of whom it
applies.* The word "man," on the other hand, is general. We say, "This
is Smith," but we do not say "This is man," but "This is a man." Thus
we may say that a word embodies a vague idea when its effects are
appropriate to an individual, but are the same for various similar
individuals, while a word embodies a general idea when its effects are
different from those appropriate to individuals. In what this difference
consists it is, however, not easy to say. I am inclined to think that it
consists merely in the knowledge that no one individual is represented,
so that what distinguishes a general idea from a vague idea is merely
the presence of a certain accompanying belief. If this view is correct,
a general idea differs from a vague one in a way analogous to that in
which a memory-image differs from an imagination-image. There also
we found that the difference consists merely of the fact that a
memory-image is accompanied by a belief, in this case as to the past.

     * "Smith" would only be a quite satisfactory representation
     of vague words if we failed to discriminate between
     different people called Smith.

It should also be said that our images even of quite particular
occurrences have always a greater or a less degree of vagueness. That is
to say, the occurrence might have varied within certain limits without
causing our image to vary recognizably. To arrive at the general it
is necessary that we should be able to contrast it with a number of
relatively precise images or words for particular occurrences; so long
as all our images and words are vague, we cannot arrive at the contrast
by which the general is defined. This is the justification for the
view which I quoted on p. 184 from Ribot (op. cit., p. 32), viz. that
intelligence progresses from the indefinite to the definite, and that
the vague appears earlier than either the particular or the general.

I think the view which I have been advocating, to the effect that a
general idea is distinguished from a vague one by the presence of a
judgment, is also that intended by Ribot when he says (op. cit., p. 92):
"The generic image is never, the concept is always, a judgment. We know
that for logicians (formerly at any rate) the concept is the simple
and primitive element; next comes the judgment, uniting two or several
concepts; then ratiocination, combining two or several judgments. For
the psychologists, on the contrary, affirmation is the fundamental
act; the concept is the result of judgment (explicit or implicit), of
similarities with exclusion of differences."

A great deal of work professing to be experimental has been done in
recent years on the psychology of thought. A good summary of such
work up to the year agog is contained in Titchener's "Lectures on the
Experimental Psychology of the Thought Processes" (1909). Three articles
in the "Archiv fur die gesammte Psychologie" by Watt,* Messer** and
Buhler*** contain a great deal of the material amassed by the methods
which Titchener calls experimental.

     * Henry J. Watt, "Experimentelle Beitrage zu einer Theorie
     des Denkens," vol. iv (1905) pp. 289-436.

     ** August Messer, "Experimentell-psychologische Untersuchu
     gen uber das Denken," vol. iii (1906), pp. 1-224.

     *** Karl Buhler, "Uber Gedanken," vol. ix (1907), pp. 297-365.

For my part I am unable to attach as much importance to this work as
many psychologists do. The method employed appears to me hardly to
fulfil the conditions of scientific experiment. Broadly speaking, what
is done is, that a set of questions are asked of various people, their
answers are recorded, and likewise their own accounts, based upon
introspection, of the processes of thought which led them to give
those answers. Much too much reliance seems to me to be placed upon the
correctness of their introspection. On introspection as a method I have
spoken earlier (Lecture VI). I am not prepared, like Professor Watson,
to reject it wholly, but I do consider that it is exceedingly fallible
and quite peculiarly liable to falsification in accordance with
preconceived theory. It is like depending upon the report of a
shortsighted person as to whom he sees coming along the road at a moment
when he is firmly convinced that Jones is sure to come. If everybody
were shortsighted and obsessed with beliefs as to what was going to be
visible, we might have to make the best of such testimony, but we should
need to correct its errors by taking care to collect the simultaneous
evidence of people with the most divergent expectations. There is no
evidence that this was done in the experiments in question, nor indeed
that the influence of theory in falsifying the introspection was at all
adequately recognized. I feel convinced that if Professor Watson had
been one of the subjects of the questionnaires, he would have given
answers totally different from those recorded in the articles in
question. Titchener quotes an opinion of Wundt on these investigations,
which appears to me thoroughly justified. "These experiments," he says,
"are not experiments at all in the sense of a scientific methodology;
they are counterfeit experiments, that seem methodical simply because
they are ordinarily performed in a psychological laboratory, and involve
the co-operation of two persons, who purport to be experimenter and
observer. In reality, they are as unmethodical as possible; they possess
none of the special features by which we distinguish the introspections
of experimental psychology from the casual introspections of everyday
life."* Titchener, of course, dissents from this opinion, but I cannot
see that his reasons for dissent are adequate. My doubts are only
increased by the fact that Buhler at any rate used trained psychologists
as his subjects. A trained psychologist is, of course, supposed to have
acquired the habit of observation, but he is at least equally likely to
have acquired a habit of seeing what his theories require. We may take
Buhler's "Uber Gedanken" to illustrate the kind of results arrived at
by such methods. Buhler says (p. 303): "We ask ourselves the general
question: 'WHAT DO WE EXPERIENCE WHEN WE THINK?' Then we do not at all
attempt a preliminary determination of the concept 'thought,' but choose
for analysis only such processes as everyone would describe as
processes of thought." The most important thing in thinking, he says, is
"awareness that..." (Bewusstheit dass), which he calls a thought. It
is, he says, thoughts in this sense that are essential to thinking.
Thinking, he maintains, does not need language or sensuous
presentations. "I assert rather that in principle every object can be
thought (meant) distinctly, without any help from sensuous presentation
(Anschauungshilfen). Every individual shade of blue colour on the
picture that hangs in my room I can think with complete distinctness
unsensuously (unanschaulich), provided it is possible that the object
should be given to me in another manner than by the help of sensations.
How that is possible we shall see later." What he calls a thought
(Gedanke) cannot be reduced, according to him, to other psychic
occurrences. He maintains that thoughts consist for the most part of
known rules (p. 342). It is clearly essential to the interest of this
theory that the thought or rule alluded to by Buhler should not need to
be expressed in words, for if it is expressed in words it is immediately
capable of being dealt with on the lines with which the behaviourists
have familiarized us. It is clear also that the supposed absence of
words rests solely upon the introspective testimony of the persons
experimented upon. I cannot think that there is sufficient certainty
of their reliability in this negative observation to make us accept a
difficult and revolutionary view of thought, merely because they have
failed to observe the presence of words or their equivalent in their
thinking. I think it far more likely, especially in view of the fact
that the persons concerned were highly educated, that we are concerned
with telescoped processes, in which habit has caused a great many
intermediate terms to be elided or to be passed over so quickly as to
escape observation.

     * Titchener, op. cit., p. 79.

I am inclined to think that similar remarks apply to the general idea of
"imageless thinking," concerning which there has been much controversy.
The advocates of imageless thinking are not contending merely that there
can be thinking which is purely verbal; they are contending that there
can be thinking which proceeds neither in words nor in images. My own
feeling is that they have rashly assumed the presence of thinking in
cases where habit has rendered thinking unnecessary. When Thorndike
experimented with animals in cages, he found that the associations
established were between a sensory stimulus and a bodily movement (not
the idea of it), without the need of supposing any non-physiological
intermediary (op. cit., p. 100 ff.). The same thing, it seems to me,
applies to ourselves. A certain sensory situation produces in us a
certain bodily movement. Sometimes this movement consists in uttering
words. Prejudice leads us to suppose that between the sensory
stimulus and the utterance of the words a process of thought must have
intervened, but there seems no good reason for such a supposition. Any
habitual action, such as eating or dressing, may be performed on the
appropriate occasion, without any need of thought, and the same seems
to be true of a painfully large proportion of our talk. What applies to
uttered speech applies of course equally to the internal speech which is
not uttered. I remain, therefore, entirely unconvinced that there is
any such phenomenon as thinking which consists neither of images nor of
words, or that "ideas" have to be added to sensations and images as part
of the material out of which mental phenomena are built.

The question of the nature of our consciousness of the universal is
much affected by our view as to the general nature of the relation of
consciousness to its object. If we adopt the view of Brentano, according
to which all mental content has essential reference to an object, it
is then natural to suppose that there is some peculiar kind of mental
content of which the object is a universal, as oppose to a particular.
According to this view, a particular cat can be PERceived or imagined,
while the universal "cat" is CONceived. But this whole manner of viewing
our dealings with universals has to be abandoned when the relation of
a mental occurrence to its "object" is regarded as merely indirect and
causal, which is the view that we have adopted. The mental content is,
of course, always particular, and the question as to what it "means"
(in case it means anything) is one which cannot be settled by merely
examining the intrinsic character of the mental content, but only by
knowing its causal connections in the case of the person concerned. To
say that a certain thought "means" a universal as opposed to either a
vague or a particular, is to say something exceedingly complex. A horse
will behave in a certain manner whenever he smells a bear, even if
the smell is derived from a bearskin. That is to say, any environment
containing an instance of the universal "smell of a bear" produces
closely similar behaviour in the horse, but we do not say that the horse
is conscious of this universal. There is equally little reason to
regard a man as conscious of the same universal, because under the same
circumstances he can react by saying, "I smell a bear." This reaction,
like that of the horse, is merely closely similar on different occasions
where the environment affords instances of the same universal. Words
of which the logical meaning is universal can therefore be employed
correctly, without anything that could be called consciousness of
universals. Such consciousness in the only sense in which it can be
said to exist is a matter of reflective judgment consisting in the
observation of similarities and differences. A universal never appears
before the mind as a single object in the sort of way in which something
perceived appears. I THINK a logical argument could be produced to show
that universals are part of the structure of the world, but they are
an inferred part, not a part of our data. What exists in us consists of
various factors, some open to external observation, others only visible
to introspection. The factors open to external observation are primarily
habits, having the peculiarity that very similar reactions are produced
by stimuli which are in many respects very different from each other. Of
this the reaction of the horse to the smell of the bear is an instance,
and so is the reaction of the man who says "bear" under the same
circumstances. The verbal reaction is, of course, the most important
from the point of view of what may be called knowledge of universals. A
man who can always use the word "dog" when he sees a dog may be said,
in a certain sense, to know the meaning of the word "dog," and IN THAT
SENSE to have knowledge of the universal "dog." But there is, of course,
a further stage reached by the logician in which he not merely reacts
with the word "dog," but sets to work to discover what it is in the
environment that causes in him this almost identical reaction on
different occasions. This further stage consists in knowledge of
similarities and differences: similarities which are necessary to the
applicability of the word "dog," and differences which are compatible
with it. Our knowledge of these similarities and differences is never
exhaustive, and therefore our knowledge of the meaning of a universal is
never complete.

In addition to external observable habits (including the habit of
words), there is also the generic image produced by the superposition,
or, in Semon's phrase, homophony, of a number of similar perceptions.
This image is vague so long as the multiplicity of its prototypes is not
recognized, but becomes universal when it exists alongside of the more
specific images of its instances, and is knowingly contrasted with them.
In this case we find again, as we found when we were discussing words
in general in the preceding lecture, that images are not logically
necessary in order to account for observable behaviour, i.e. in this
case intelligent speech. Intelligent speech could exist as a motor
habit, without any accompaniment of images, and this conclusion applies
to words of which the meaning is universal, just as much as to words of
which the meaning is relatively particular. If this conclusion is valid,
it follows that behaviourist psychology, which eschews introspective
data, is capable of being an independent science, and of accounting
for all that part of the behaviour of other people which is commonly
regarded as evidence that they think. It must be admitted that this
conclusion considerably weakens the reliance which can be placed upon
introspective data. They must be accepted simply on account of the
fact that we seem to perceive them, not on account of their supposed
necessity for explaining the data of external observation.

This, at any rate, is the conclusion to which we are forced, so long
as, with the behaviourists, we accept common-sense views of the physical
world. But if, as I have urged, the physical world itself, as known,
is infected through and through with subjectivity, if, as the theory
of relativity suggests, the physical universe contains the diversity of
points of view which we have been accustomed to regard as distinctively
psychological, then we are brought back by this different road to the
necessity for trusting observations which are in an important sense
private. And it is the privacy of introspective data which causes much
of the behaviourists' objection to them.

This is an example of the difficulty of constructing an adequate
philosophy of any one science without taking account of other sciences.
The behaviourist philosophy of psychology, though in many respects
admirable from the point of view of method, appears to me to fail in
the last analysis because it is based upon an inadequate philosophy of
physics. In spite, therefore, of the fact that the evidence for images,
whether generic or particular, is merely introspective, I cannot
admit that images should be rejected, or that we should minimize their
function in our knowledge of what is remote in time or space.




LECTURE XII. BELIEF

Belief, which is our subject to-day, is the central problem in the
analysis of mind. Believing seems the most "mental" thing we do,
the thing most remote from what is done by mere matter. The whole
intellectual life consists of beliefs, and of the passage from one
belief to another by what is called "reasoning." Beliefs give knowledge
and error; they are the vehicles of truth and falsehood. Psychology,
theory of knowledge and metaphysics revolve about belief, and on the
view we take of belief our philosophical outlook largely depends.

Before embarking upon the detailed analysis of belief, we shall do well
to note certain requisites which any theory must fulfil.

(1) Just as words are characterized by meaning, so beliefs are
characterized by truth or falsehood. And just as meaning consists in
relation to the object meant, so truth and falsehood consist in
relation to something that lies outside the belief. You may believe that
such-and-such a horse will win the Derby. The time comes, and your horse
wins or does not win; according to the outcome, your belief was true or
false. You may believe that six times nine is fifty-six; in this case
also there is a fact which makes your belief false. You may believe that
America was discovered in 1492, or that it was discovered in 1066. In
the one case your belief is true, in the other false; in either case
its truth or falsehood depends upon the actions of Columbus, not upon
anything present or under your control. What makes a belief true or
false I call a "fact." The particular fact that makes a given belief
true or false I call its "objective,"* and the relation of the belief to
its objective I call the "reference" or the "objective reference" of the
belief. Thus, if I believe that Columbus crossed the Atlantic in 1492,
the "objective" of my belief is Columbus's actual voyage, and the
"reference" of my belief is the relation between my belief and the
voyage--that relation, namely, in virtue of which the voyage makes my
belief true (or, in another case, false). "Reference" of beliefs differs
from "meaning" of words in various ways, but especially in the fact that
it is of two kinds, "true" reference and "false" reference. The truth
or falsehood of a belief does not depend upon anything intrinsic to
the belief, but upon the nature of its relation to its objective. The
intrinsic nature of belief can be treated without reference to what
makes it true or false. In the remainder of the present lecture I shall
ignore truth and falsehood, which will be the subject of Lecture XIII.
It is the intrinsic nature of belief that will concern us to-day.

     * This terminology is suggested by Meinong, but is not
     exactly the same as his.

(2) We must distinguish between believing and what is believed. I may
believe that Columbus crossed the Atlantic, that all Cretans are liars,
that two and two are four, or that nine times six is fifty-six; in
all these cases the believing is just the same, and only the contents
believed are different. I may remember my breakfast this morning, my
lecture last week, or my first sight of New York. In all these cases the
feeling of memory-belief is just the same, and only what is remembered
differs. Exactly similar remarks apply to expectations. Bare assent,
memory and expectation are forms of belief; all three are different from
what is believed, and each has a constant character which is independent
of what is believed.

In Lecture I we criticized the analysis of a presentation into act,
content and object. But our analysis of belief contains three very
similar elements, namely the believing, what is believed and the
objective. The objections to the act (in the case of presentations)
are not valid against the believing in the case of beliefs, because the
believing is an actual experienced feeling, not something postulated,
like the act. But it is necessary first to complete our preliminary
requisites, and then to examine the content of a belief. After that, we
shall be in a position to return to the question as to what constitutes
believing.

(3) What is believed, and the believing, must both consist of present
occurrences in the believer, no matter what may be the objective of
the belief. Suppose I believe, for example, "that Caesar crossed the
Rubicon." The objective of my belief is an event which happened long
ago, which I never saw and do not remember. This event itself is not in
my mind when I believe that it happened. It is not correct to say that
I am believing the actual event; what I am believing is something now
in my mind, something related to the event (in a way which we shall
investigate in Lecture XIII), but obviously not to be confounded with
the event, since the event is not occurring now but the believing is.
What a man is believing at a given moment is wholly determinate if we
know the contents of his mind at that moment; but Caesar's crossing of
the Rubicon was an historical physical event, which is distinct from the
present contents of every present mind. What is believed, however true
it may be, is not the actual fact that makes the belief true, but a
present event related to the fact. This present event, which is what is
believed, I shall call the "content" of the belief. We have already had
occasion to notice the distinction between content and objective in the
case of memory-beliefs, where the content is "this occurred" and the
objective is the past event.

(4) Between content and objective there is sometimes a very wide gulf,
for example in the case of "Caesar crossed the Rubicon." This gulf may,
when it is first perceived, give us a feeling that we cannot really
"know" anything about the outer world. All we can "know," it may be
said, is what is now in our thoughts. If Caesar and the Rubicon cannot
be bodily in our thoughts, it might seem as though we must remain cut
off from knowledge of them. I shall not now deal at length with this
feeling, since it is necessary first to define "knowing," which cannot
be done yet. But I will say, as a preliminary answer, that the feeling
assumes an ideal of knowing which I believe to be quite mistaken. It
assumes, if it is thought out, something like the mystic unity of knower
and known. These two are often said to be combined into a unity by the
fact of cognition; hence when this unity is plainly absent, it may
seem as if there were no genuine cognition. For my part, I think such
theories and feelings wholly mistaken: I believe knowing to be a very
external and complicated relation, incapable of exact definition,
dependent upon causal laws, and involving no more unity than there is
between a signpost and the town to which it points. I shall return to
this question on a later occasion; for the moment these provisional
remarks must suffice.

(5) The objective reference of a belief is connected with the fact that
all or some of the constituents of its content have meaning. If I say
"Caesar conquered Gaul," a person who knows the meaning of the three
words composing my statement knows as much as can be known about the
nature of the objective which would make my statement true. It is clear
that the objective reference of a belief is, in general, in some way
derivative from the meanings of the words or images that occur in its
content. There are, however, certain complications which must be borne
in mind. In the first place, it might be contended that a memory-image
acquires meaning only through the memory-belief, which would seem, at
least in the case of memory, to make belief more primitive than the
meaning of images. In the second place, it is a very singular thing that
meaning, which is single, should generate objective reference, which is
dual, namely true and false. This is one of the facts which any theory
of belief must explain if it is to be satisfactory.

It is now time to leave these preliminary requisites, and attempt the
analysis of the contents of beliefs.

The first thing to notice about what is believed, i.e. about the content
of a belief, is that it is always complex: We believe that a certain
thing has a certain property, or a certain relation to something else,
or that it occurred or will occur (in the sense discussed at the end of
Lecture IX); or we may believe that all the members of a certain class
have a certain property, or that a certain property sometimes occurs
among the members of a class; or we may believe that if one thing
happens, another will happen (for example, "if it rains I shall bring my
umbrella"), or we may believe that something does not happen, or did not
or will not happen (for example, "it won't rain"); or that one of two
things must happen (for example, "either you withdraw your accusation,
or I shall bring a libel action"). The catalogue of the sorts of things
we may believe is infinite, but all of them are complex.

Language sometimes conceals the complexity of a belief. We say that a
person believes in God, and it might seem as if God formed the whole
content of the belief. But what is really believed is that God exists,
which is very far from being simple. Similarly, when a person has a
memory-image with a memory-belief, the belief is "this occurred," in
the sense explained in Lecture IX; and "this occurred" is not simple.
In like manner all cases where the content of a belief seems simple at
first sight will be found, on examination, to confirm the view that the
content is always complex.

The content of a belief involves not merely a plurality of constituents,
but definite relations between them; it is not determinate when its
constituents alone are given. For example, "Plato preceded Aristotle"
and "Aristotle preceded Plato" are both contents which may be believed,
but, although they consist of exactly the same constituents, they are
different, and even incompatible.

The content of a belief may consist of words only, or of images only, or
of a mixture of the two, or of either or both together with one or more
sensations. It must contain at least one constituent which is a word
or an image, and it may or may not contain one or more sensations as
constituents. Some examples will make these various possibilities clear.

We may take first recognition, in either of the forms "this is of
such-and-such a kind" or "this has occurred before." In either case,
present sensation is a constituent. For example, you hear a noise, and
you say to yourself "tram." Here the noise and the word "tram" are both
constituents of your belief; there is also a relation between them,
expressed by "is" in the proposition "that is a tram." As soon as your
act of recognition is completed by the occurrence of the word "tram,"
your actions are affected: you hurry if you want the tram, or cease to
hurry if you want a bus. In this case the content of your belief is a
sensation (the noise) and a word ("tram") related in a way which may be
called predication.

The same noise may bring into your mind the visual image of a tram,
instead of the word "tram." In this case your belief consists of a
sensation and an image suitable related. Beliefs of this class are what
are called "judgments of perception." As we saw in Lecture VIII, the
images associated with a sensation often come with such spontaneity
and force that the unsophisticated do not distinguish them from the
sensation; it is only the psychologist or the skilled observer who is
aware of the large mnemic element that is added to sensation to make
perception. It may be objected that what is added consists merely of
images without belief. This is no doubt sometimes the case, but
is certainly sometimes not the case. That belief always occurs in
perception as opposed to sensation it is not necessary for us to
maintain; it is enough for our purposes to note that it sometimes
occurs, and that when it does, the content of our belief consists of a
sensation and an image suitably related.

In a PURE memory-belief only images occur. But a mixture of words
and images is very common in memory. You have an image of the past
occurrence, and you say to yourself: "Yes, that's how it was." Here the
image and the words together make up the content of the belief. And
when the remembering of an incident has become a habit, it may be purely
verbal, and the memory-belief may consist of words alone.

The more complicated forms of belief tend to consist only of words.
Often images of various kinds accompany them, but they are apt to
be irrelevant, and to form no part of what is actually believed. For
example, in thinking of the Solar System, you are likely to have vague
images of pictures you have seen of the earth surrounded by clouds,
Saturn and his rings, the sun during an eclipse, and so on; but none of
these form part of your belief that the planets revolve round the sun
in elliptical orbits. The only images that form an actual part of such
beliefs are, as a rule, images of words. And images of words, for the
reasons considered in Lecture VIII, cannot be distinguished with any
certainty from sensations, when, as is often, if not usually, the case,
they are kinaesthetic images of pronouncing the words.

It is impossible for a belief to consist of sensations alone, except
when, as in the case of words, the sensations have associations which
make them signs possessed of meaning. The reason is that objective
reference is of the essence of belief, and objective reference is
derived from meaning. When I speak of a belief consisting partly of
sensations and partly of words, I do not mean to deny that the words,
when they are not mere images, are sensational, but that they occur as
signs, not (so to speak) in their own right. To revert to the noise of
the tram, when you hear it and say "tram," the noise and the word are
both sensations (if you actually pronounce the word), but the noise is
part of the fact which makes your belief true, whereas the word is not
part of this fact. It is the MEANING of the word "tram," not the actual
word, that forms part of the fact which is the objective of your
belief. Thus the word occurs in the belief as a symbol, in virtue of
its meaning, whereas the noise enters into both the belief and its
objective. It is this that distinguishes the occurrence of words as
symbols from the occurrence of sensations in their own right: the
objective contains the sensations that occur in their own right, but
contains only the meanings of the words that occur as symbols.

For the sake of simplicity, we may ignore the cases in which sensations
in their own right form part of the content of a belief, and confine
ourselves to images and words. We may also omit the cases in which
both images and words occur in the content of a belief. Thus we become
confined to two cases: (a) when the content consists wholly of images,
(b) when it consists wholly of words. The case of mixed images and words
has no special importance, and its omission will do no harm.

Let us take in illustration a case of memory. Suppose you are thinking
of some familiar room. You may call up an image of it, and in your image
the window may be to the left of the door. Without any intrusion of
words, you may believe in the correctness of your image. You then have a
belief, consisting wholly of images, which becomes, when put into words,
"the window is to the left of the door." You may yourself use these
words and proceed to believe them. You thus pass from an image-content
to the corresponding word-content. The content is different in the two
cases, but its objective reference is the same. This shows the relation
of image-beliefs to word-beliefs in a very simple case. In more
elaborate cases the relation becomes much less simple.

It may be said that even in this very simple case the objective
reference of the word-content is not quite the same as that of the
image-content, that images have a wealth of concrete features which are
lost when words are substituted, that the window in the image is not a
mere window in the abstract, but a window of a certain shape and size,
not merely to the left of the door, but a certain distance to the left,
and so on. In reply, it may be admitted at once that there is, as a
rule, a certain amount of truth in the objection. But two points may be
urged to minimize its force. First, images do not, as a rule, have that
wealth of concrete detail that would make it IMPOSSIBLE to express
them fully in words. They are vague and fragmentary: a finite number
of words, though perhaps a large number, would exhaust at least their
SIGNIFICANT features. For--and this is our second point--images enter
into the content of a belief through the fact that they are capable of
meaning, and their meaning does not, as a rule, have as much complexity
as they have: some of their characteristics are usually devoid of
meaning. Thus it may well be possible to extract in words all that
has meaning in an image-content; in that case the word-content and the
image-content will have exactly the same objective reference.

The content of a belief, when expressed in words, is the same thing (or
very nearly the same thing) as what in logic is called a "proposition."
A proposition is a series of words (or sometimes a single word)
expressing the kind of thing that can be asserted or denied. "That all
men are mortal," "that Columbus discovered America," "that Charles I
died in his bed," "that all philosophers are wise," are propositions.
Not any series of words is a proposition, but only such series of words
as have "meaning," or, in our phraseology, "objective reference." Given
the meanings of separate words, and the rules of syntax, the meaning of
a proposition is determinate. This is the reason why we can understand
a sentence we never heard before. You probably never heard before the
proposition "that the inhabitants of the Andaman Islands habitually
eat stewed hippopotamus for dinner," but there is no difficulty in
understanding the proposition. The question of the relation between
the meaning of a sentence and the meanings of the separate words is
difficult, and I shall not pursue it now; I brought it up solely as
being illustrative of the nature of propositions.

We may extend the term "proposition" so as to cover the image-contents
of beliefs consisting of images. Thus, in the case of remembering a
room in which the window is to the left of the door, when we believe the
image-content the proposition will consist of the image of the window
on the left together with the image of the door on the right. We will
distinguish propositions of this kind as "image-propositions"
and propositions in words as "word-propositions." We may identify
propositions in general with the contents of actual and possible
beliefs, and we may say that it is propositions that are true or false.
In logic we are concerned with propositions rather than beliefs, since
logic is not interested in what people do in fact believe, but only
in the conditions which determine the truth or falsehood of possible
beliefs. Whenever possible, except when actual beliefs are in question,
it is generally a simplification to deal with propositions.

It would seem that image-propositions are more primitive than
word-propositions, and may well ante-date language. There is no reason
why memory-images, accompanied by that very simple belief-feeling which
we decided to be the essence of memory, should not have occurred before
language arose; indeed, it would be rash to assert positively that
memory of this sort does not occur among the higher animals. Our more
elementary beliefs, notably those that are added to sensation to make
perception, often remain at the level of images. For example, most of
the visual objects in our neighbourhood rouse tactile images: we have a
different feeling in looking at a sofa from what we have in looking at
a block of marble, and the difference consists chiefly in different
stimulation of our tactile imagination. It may be said that the tactile
images are merely present, without any accompanying belief; but I think
this view, though sometimes correct, derives its plausibility as a
general proposition from our thinking of explicit conscious belief only.
Most of our beliefs, like most of our wishes, are "unconscious," in the
sense that we have never told ourselves that we have them. Such beliefs
display themselves when the expectations that they arouse fail in any
way. For example, if someone puts tea (without milk) into a glass, and
you drink it under the impression that it is going to be beer; or if you
walk on what appears to be a tiled floor, and it turns out to be a soft
carpet made to look like tiles. The shock of surprise on an occasion of
this kind makes us aware of the expectations that habitually enter into
our perceptions; and such expectations must be classed as beliefs, in
spite of the fact that we do not normally take note of them or put them
into words. I remember once watching a cock pigeon running over and over
again to the edge of a looking-glass to try to wreak vengeance on the
particularly obnoxious bird whom he expected to find there, judging by
what he saw in the glass. He must have experienced each time the sort of
surprise on finding nothing, which is calculated to lead in time to
the adoption of Berkeley's theory that objects of sense are only in the
mind. His expectation, though not expressed in words, deserved, I think,
to be called a belief.

I come now to the question what constitutes believing, as opposed to the
content believed.

To begin with, there are various different attitudes that may be taken
towards the same content. Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that
you have a visual image of your breakfast-table. You may expect it while
you are dressing in the morning; remember it as you go to your work;
feel doubt as to its correctness when questioned as to your powers of
visualizing; merely entertain the image, without connecting it with
anything external, when you are going to sleep; desire it if you are
hungry, or feel aversion for it if you are ill. Suppose, for the sake of
definiteness, that the content is "an egg for breakfast." Then you have
the following attitudes "I expect there will be an egg for breakfast";
"I remember there was an egg for breakfast"; "Was there an egg for
breakfast?" "An egg for breakfast: well, what of it?" "I hope there
will be an egg for breakfast"; "I am afraid there will be an egg for
breakfast and it is sure to be bad." I do not suggest that this is a
list of all possible attitudes on the subject; I say only that they
are different attitudes, all concerned with the one content "an egg for
breakfast."

These attitudes are not all equally ultimate. Those that involve desire
and aversion have occupied us in Lecture III. For the present, we are
only concerned with such as are cognitive. In speaking of memory, we
distinguished three kinds of belief directed towards the same
content, namely memory, expectation and bare assent without any
time-determination in the belief-feeling. But before developing this
view, we must examine two other theories which might be held concerning
belief, and which, in some ways, would be more in harmony with a
behaviourist outlook than the theory I wish to advocate.

(1) The first theory to be examined is the view that the differentia of
belief consists in its causal efficacy I do not wish to make any author
responsible for this theory: I wish merely to develop it hypothetically
so that we may judge of its tenability.

We defined the meaning of an image or word by causal efficacy, namely by
associations: an image or word acquires meaning, we said, through having
the same associations as what it means.

We propose hypothetically to define "belief" by a different kind
of causal efficacy, namely efficacy in causing voluntary movements.
(Voluntary movements are defined as those vital movements which are
distinguished from reflex movements as involving the higher nervous
centres. I do not like to distinguish them by means of such notions as
"consciousness" or "will," because I do not think these notions, in any
definable sense, are always applicable. Moreover, the purpose of the
theory we are examining is to be, as far as possible, physiological and
behaviourist, and this purpose is not achieved if we introduce such a
conception as "consciousness" or "will." Nevertheless, it is necessary
for our purpose to find some way of distinguishing between voluntary and
reflex movements, since the results would be too paradoxical, if we were
to say that reflex movements also involve beliefs.) According to this
definition, a content is said to be "believed" when it causes us to
move. The images aroused are the same if you say to me, "Suppose there
were an escaped tiger coming along the street," and if you say to me,
"There is an escaped tiger coming along the street." But my actions will
be very different in the two cases: in the first, I shall remain calm;
in the second, it is possible that I may not. It is suggested, by the
theory we are considering, that this difference of effects constitutes
what is meant by saying that in the second case I believe the
proposition suggested, while in the first case I do not. According
to this view, images or words are "believed" when they cause bodily
movements.

I do not think this theory is adequate, but I think it is suggestive
of truth, and not so easily refutable as it might appear to be at first
sight.

It might be objected to the theory that many things which we certainly
believe do not call for any bodily movements. I believe that Great
Britain is an island, that whales are mammals, that Charles I was
executed, and so on; and at first sight it seems obvious that such
beliefs, as a rule, do not call for any action on my part. But when we
investigate the matter more closely, it becomes more doubtful. To begin
with, we must distinguish belief as a mere DISPOSITION from actual
active belief. We speak as if we always believed that Charles I was
executed, but that only means that we are always ready to believe it
when the subject comes up. The phenomenon we are concerned to analyse
is the active belief, not the permanent disposition. Now, what are
the occasions when, we actively believe that Charles I was executed?
Primarily: examinations, when we perform the bodily movement of writing
it down; conversation, when we assert it to display our historical
erudition; and political discourses, when we are engaged in showing what
Soviet government leads to. In all these cases bodily movements (writing
or speaking) result from our belief.

But there remains the belief which merely occurs in "thinking." One may
set to work to recall some piece of history one has been reading, and
what one recalls is believed, although it probably does not cause any
bodily movement whatever. It is true that what we believe always MAY
influence action. Suppose I am invited to become King of Georgia: I find
the prospect attractive, and go to Cook's to buy a third-class ticket to
my new realm. At the last moment I remember Charles I and all the other
monarchs who have come to a bad end; I change my mind, and walk out
without completing the transaction. But such incidents are rare, and
cannot constitute the whole of my belief that Charles I was executed.
The conclusion seems to be that, although a belief always MAY influence
action if it becomes relevant to a practical issue, it often exists
actively (not as a mere disposition) without producing any voluntary
movement whatever. If this is true, we cannot define belief by the
effect on voluntary movements.

There is another, more theoretical, ground for rejecting the view we
are examining. It is clear that a proposition can be either believed or
merely considered, and that the content is the same in both cases. We
can expect an egg for breakfast, or merely entertain the supposition
that there may be an egg for breakfast. A moment ago I considered the
possibility of being invited to become King of Georgia, but I do not
believe that this will happen. Now, it seems clear that, since believing
and considering have different effects if one produces bodily movements
while the other does not, there must be some intrinsic difference
between believing and considering*; for if they were precisely similar,
their effects also would be precisely similar. We have seen that the
difference between believing a given proposition and merely considering
it does not lie in the content; therefore there must be, in one case
or in both, something additional to the content which distinguishes the
occurrence of a belief from the occurrence of a mere consideration
of the same content. So far as the theoretical argument goes, this
additional element may exist only in belief, or only in consideration,
or there may be one sort of additional element in the case of belief,
and another in the case of consideration. This brings us to the second
view which we have to examine.

     * Cf. Brentano, "Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte,"
     p. 268 (criticizing Bain, "The Emotions and the Will").

(1) The theory which we have now to consider regards belief as belonging
to every idea which is entertained, except in so far as some positive
counteracting force interferes. In this view belief is not a positive
phenomenon, though doubt and disbelief are so. What we call belief,
according to this hypothesis, involves only the appropriate content,
which will have the effects characteristic of belief unless something
else operating simultaneously inhibits them. James (Psychology, vol.
ii, p. 288) quotes with approval, though inaccurately, a passage from
Spinoza embodying this view:

"Let us conceive a boy imagining to himself a horse, and taking note of
nothing else. As this imagination involves the existence of the horse,
AND THE BOY HAS NO PERCEPTION WHICH ANNULS ITS EXISTENCE [James's
italics], he will necessarily contemplate the horse as present, nor will
he be able to doubt of its existence, however little certain of it he
may be. I deny that a man in so far as he imagines [percipit] affirms
nothing. For what is it to imagine a winged horse but to affirm that the
horse [that horse, namely] has wings? For if the mind had nothing before
it but the winged horse, it would contemplate the same as present, would
have no cause to doubt of its existence, nor any power of dissenting
from its existence, unless the imagination of the winged horse were
joined to an idea which contradicted [tollit] its existence" ("Ethics,"
vol. ii, p. 49, Scholium).

To this doctrine James entirely assents, adding in italics:

"ANY OBJECT WHICH REMAINS UNCONTRADICTED IS IPSO FACTO BELIEVED AND
POSITED AS ABSOLUTE REALITY."

If this view is correct, it follows (though James does not draw
the inference) that there is no need of any specific feeling called
"belief," and that the mere existence of images yields all that is
required. The state of mind in which we merely consider a proposition,
without believing or disbelieving it, will then appear as a
sophisticated product, the result of some rival force adding to the
image-proposition a positive feeling which may be called suspense or
non-belief--a feeling which may be compared to that of a man about to
run a race waiting for the signal. Such a man, though not moving, is in
a very different condition from that of a man quietly at rest And so the
man who is considering a proposition without believing it will be in
a state of tension, restraining the natural tendency to act upon the
proposition which he would display if nothing interfered. In this view
belief primarily consists merely in the existence of the appropriate
images without any counteracting forces.

There is a great deal to be said in favour of this view, and I have some
hesitation in regarding it as inadequate. It fits admirably with the
phenomena of dreams and hallucinatory images, and it is recommended by
the way in which it accords with mental development. Doubt, suspense
of judgment and disbelief all seem later and more complex than a wholly
unreflecting assent. Belief as a positive phenomenon, if it exists,
may be regarded, in this view, as a product of doubt, a decision after
debate, an acceptance, not merely of THIS, but of THIS-RATHER-THAN-THAT.
It is not difficult to suppose that a dog has images (possible
olfactory) of his absent master, or of the rabbit that he dreams of
hunting. But it is very difficult to suppose that he can entertain mere
imagination-images to which no assent is given.

I think it must be conceded that a mere image, without the addition of
any positive feeling that could be called "belief," is apt to have a
certain dynamic power, and in this sense an uncombated image has the
force of a belief. But although this may be true, it accounts only for
some of the simplest phenomena in the region of belief. It will not, for
example, explain memory. Nor can it explain beliefs which do not issue
in any proximate action, such as those of mathematics. I conclude,
therefore, that there must be belief-feelings of the same order as those
of doubt or disbelief, although phenomena closely analogous to those of
belief can be produced by mere uncontradicted images.

(3) I come now to the view of belief which I wish to advocate. It seems
to me that there are at least three kinds of belief, namely memory,
expectation and bare assent. Each of these I regard as constituted by
a certain feeling or complex of sensations, attached to the content
believed. We may illustrate by an example. Suppose I am believing,
by means of images, not words, that it will rain. We have here two
interrelated elements, namely the content and the expectation. The
content consists of images of (say) the visual appearance of rain, the
feeling of wetness, the patter of drops, interrelated, roughly, as the
sensations would be if it were raining. Thus the content is a complex
fact composed of images. Exactly the same content may enter into the
memory "it was raining" or the assent "rain occurs." The difference of
these cases from each other and from expectation does not lie in the
content. The difference lies in the nature of the belief-feeling.
I, personally, do not profess to be able to analyse the sensations
constituting respectively memory, expectation and assent; but I am
not prepared to say that they cannot be analysed. There may be other
belief-feelings, for example in disjunction and implication; also a
disbelief-feeling.

It is not enough that the content and the belief-feeling should coexist:
it is necessary that there should be a specific relation between them,
of the sort expressed by saying that the content is what is believed.
If this were not obvious, it could be made plain by an argument. If
the mere co-existence of the content and the belief-feeling sufficed,
whenever we were having (say) a memory-feeling we should be remembering
any proposition which came into our minds at the same time. But this is
not the case, since we may simultaneously remember one proposition and
merely consider another.

We may sum up our analysis, in the case of bare assent to a proposition
not expressed in words, as follows: (a) We have a proposition,
consisting of interrelated images, and possibly partly of sensations;
(b) we have the feeling of assent, which is presumably a complex
sensation demanding analysis; (c) we have a relation, actually
subsisting, between the assent and the proposition, such as is expressed
by saying that the proposition in question is what is assented to. For
other forms of belief-feeling or of content, we have only to make the
necessary substitutions in this analysis.

If we are right in our analysis of belief, the use of words in
expressing beliefs is apt to be misleading. There is no way of
distinguishing, in words, between a memory and an assent to a
proposition about the past: "I ate my breakfast" and "Caesar conquered
Gaul" have the same verbal form, though (assuming that I remember my
breakfast) they express occurrences which are psychologically very
different. In the one case, what happens is that I remember the content
"eating my breakfast"; in the other case, I assent to the content
"Caesar's conquest of Gaul occurred." In the latter case, but not in the
former, the pastness is part of the content believed. Exactly similar
remarks apply to the difference between expectation, such as we have
when waiting for the thunder after a flash of lightning, and assent to a
proposition about the future, such as we have in all the usual cases of
inferential knowledge as to what will occur. I think this difficulty in
the verbal expression of the temporal aspects of beliefs is one among
the causes which have hampered philosophy in the consideration of time.

The view of belief which I have been advocating contains little that is
novel except the distinction of kinds of belief-feeling--such as memory
and expectation. Thus James says: "Everyone knows the difference between
imagining a thing and believing in its existence, between supposing a
proposition and acquiescing in its truth...IN ITS INNER NATURE, BELIEF,
OR THE SENSE OF REALITY, IS A SORT OF FEELING MORE ALLIED TO THE
EMOTIONS THAN TO ANYTHING ELSE" ("Psychology," vol. ii, p. 283. James's
italics). He proceeds to point out that drunkenness, and, still more,
nitrous-oxide intoxication, will heighten the sense of belief: in the
latter case, he says, a man's very soul may sweat with conviction, and
he be all the time utterly unable to say what he is convinced of. It
would seem that, in such cases, the feeling of belief exists unattached,
without its usual relation to a content believed, just as the feeling
of familiarity may sometimes occur without being related to any definite
familiar object. The feeling of belief, when it occurs in this separated
heightened form, generally leads us to look for a content to which to
attach it. Much of what passes for revelation or mystic insight probably
comes in this way: the belief-feeling, in abnormal strength, attaches
itself, more or less accidentally, to some content which we happen to
think of at the appropriate moment. But this is only a speculation, upon
which I do not wish to lay too much stress.




LECTURE XIII. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

The definition of truth and falsehood, which is our topic to-day, lies
strictly outside our general subject, namely the analysis of mind. From
the psychological standpoint, there may be different kinds of belief,
and different degrees of certainty, but there cannot be any purely
psychological means of distinguishing between true and false beliefs.
A belief is rendered true or false by relation to a fact, which may lie
outside the experience of the person entertaining the belief. Truth and
falsehood, except in the case of beliefs about our own minds, depend
upon the relations of mental occurrences to outside things, and thus
take us beyond the analysis of mental occurrences as they are in
themselves. Nevertheless, we can hardly avoid the consideration of truth
and falsehood. We wish to believe that our beliefs, sometimes at least,
yield KNOWLEDGE, and a belief does not yield knowledge unless it is
true. The question whether our minds are instruments of knowledge, and,
if so, in what sense, is so vital that any suggested analysis of mind
must be examined in relation to this question. To ignore this question
would be like describing a chronometer without regard to its accuracy
as a time-keeper, or a thermometer without mentioning the fact that it
measures temperature.

Many difficult questions arise in connection with knowledge. It is
difficult to define knowledge, difficult to decide whether we have any
knowledge, and difficult, even if it is conceded that we sometimes have
knowledge to discover whether we can ever know that we have knowledge
in this or that particular case. I shall divide the discussion into four
parts:

I. We may regard knowledge, from a behaviourist standpoint, as exhibited
in a certain kind of response to the environment. This response must
have some characteristics which it shares with those of scientific
instruments, but must also have others that are peculiar to knowledge.
We shall find that this point of view is important, but not exhaustive
of the nature of knowledge.

II. We may hold that the beliefs that constitute knowledge are
distinguished from such as are erroneous or uncertain by properties
which are intrinsic either to single beliefs or to systems of beliefs,
being in either case discoverable without reference to outside fact.
Views of this kind have been widely held among philosophers, but we
shall find no reason to accept them.

III. We believe that some beliefs are true, and some false. This raises
the problem of VERIFIABILITY: are there any circumstances which can
justifiably give us an unusual degree of certainty that such and such a
belief is true? It is obvious that there are circumstances which in fact
cause a certainty of this sort, and we wish to learn what we can from
examining these circumstances.

IV. Finally, there is the formal problem of defining truth and
falsehood, and deriving the objective reference of a proposition from
the meanings of its component words.

We will consider these four problems in succession.

I. We may regard a human being as an instrument, which makes various
responses to various stimuli. If we observe these responses from
outside, we shall regard them as showing knowledge when they display
two characteristics, ACCURACY and APPROPRIATENESS. These two are quite
distinct, and even sometimes incompatible. If I am being pursued by
a tiger, accuracy is furthered by turning round to look at him, but
appropriateness by running away without making any search for
further knowledge of the beast. I shall return to the question of
appropriateness later; for the present it is accuracy that I wish to
consider.

When we are viewing a man from the outside, it is not his beliefs,
but his bodily movements, that we can observe. His knowledge must be
inferred from his bodily movements, and especially from what he says
and writes. For the present we may ignore beliefs, and regard a man's
knowledge as actually consisting in what he says and does. That is to
say, we will construct, as far as possible, a purely behaviouristic
account of truth and falsehood.

If you ask a boy "What is twice two?" and the boy says "four," you take
that as prima facie evidence that the boy knows what twice two is. But
if you go on to ask what is twice three, twice four, twice five, and so
on, and the boy always answers "four," you come to the conclusion that
he knows nothing about it. Exactly similar remarks apply to scientific
instruments. I know a certain weather-cock which has the pessimistic
habit of always pointing to the north-east. If you were to see it first
on a cold March day, you would think it an excellent weather-cock; but
with the first warm day of spring your confidence would be shaken. The
boy and the weather-cock have the same defect: they do not vary their
response when the stimulus is varied. A good instrument, or a person
with much knowledge, will give different responses to stimuli which
differ in relevant ways. This is the first point in defining accuracy of
response.

We will now assume another boy, who also, when you first question him,
asserts that twice two is four. But with this boy, instead of asking him
different questions, you make a practice of asking him the same question
every day at breakfast. You find that he says five, or six, or seven, or
any other number at random, and you conclude that he also does not know
what twice two is, though by good luck he answered right the first time.
This boy is like a weather-cock which, instead of being stuck fast, is
always going round and round, changing without any change of wind. This
boy and weather-cock have the opposite defect to that of the previous
pair: they give different responses to stimuli which do not differ in
any relevant way.

In connection with vagueness in memory, we already had occasion to
consider the definition of accuracy. Omitting some of the niceties of
our previous discussion, we may say that an instrument is ACCURATE when
it avoids the defects of the two boys and weather-cocks, that is to say,
when--

(a) It gives different responses to stimuli which differ in relevant
ways;

(b) It gives the same response to stimuli which do not differ in
relevant ways.

What are relevant ways depends upon the nature and purpose of the
instrument. In the case of a weather-cock, the direction of the wind is
relevant, but not its strength; in the case of the boy, the meaning of
the words of your question is relevant, but not the loudness of your
voice, or whether you are his father or his schoolmaster If, however,
you were a boy of his own age, that would be relevant, and the
appropriate response would be different.

It is clear that knowledge is displayed by accuracy of response to
certain kinds of stimuli, e.g. examinations. Can we say, conversely,
that it consists wholly of such accuracy of response? I do not think
we can; but we can go a certain distance in this direction. For this
purpose we must define more carefully the kind of accuracy and the kind
of response that may be expected where there is knowledge.

From our present point of view, it is difficult to exclude perception
from knowledge; at any rate, knowledge is displayed by actions based
upon perception. A bird flying among trees avoids bumping into their
branches; its avoidance is a response to visual sensations. This
response has the characteristic of accuracy, in the main, and leads
us to say that the bird "knows," by sight, what objects are in its
neighbourhood. For a behaviourist, this must certainly count as
knowledge, however it may be viewed by analytic psychology. In this
case, what is known, roughly, is the stimulus; but in more advanced
knowledge the stimulus and what is known become different. For example,
you look in your calendar and find that Easter will be early next year.
Here the stimulus is the calendar, whereas the response concerns the
future. Even this can be paralleled among instruments: the behaviour of
the barometer has a present stimulus but foretells the future, so that
the barometer might be said, in a sense, to know the future. However
that may be, the point I am emphasizing as regards knowledge is that
what is known may be quite different from the stimulus, and no part of
the cause of the knowledge-response. It is only in sense-knowledge that
the stimulus and what is known are, with qualifications, identifiable.
In knowledge of the future, it is obvious that they are totally
distinct, since otherwise the response would precede the stimulus. In
abstract knowledge also they are distinct, since abstract facts have no
date. In knowledge of the past there are complications, which we must
briefly examine.

Every form of memory will be, from our present point of view, in one
sense a delayed response. But this phrase does not quite clearly
express what is meant. If you light a fuse and connect it with a heap of
dynamite, the explosion of the dynamite may be spoken of, in a sense,
as a delayed response to your lighting of the fuse. But that only means
that it is a somewhat late portion of a continuous process of which the
earlier parts have less emotional interest. This is not the case
with habit. A display of habit has two sorts of causes: (a) the past
occurrences which generated the habit, (b) the present occurrence which
brings it into play. When you drop a weight on your toe, and say what
you do say, the habit has been caused by imitation of your undesirable
associates, whereas it is brought into play by the dropping of the
weight. The great bulk of our knowledge is a habit in this sense:
whenever I am asked when I was born, I reply correctly by mere habit. It
would hardly be correct to say that getting born was the stimulus, and
that my reply is a delayed response But in cases of memory this way
of speaking would have an element of truth. In an habitual memory, the
event remembered was clearly an essential part of the stimulus to the
formation of the habit. The present stimulus which brings the habit into
play produces a different response from that which it would produce if
the habit did not exist. Therefore the habit enters into the causation
of the response, and so do, at one remove, the causes of the habit. It
follows that an event remembered is an essential part of the causes of
our remembering.

In spite, however, of the fact that what is known is SOMETIMES an
indispensable part of the cause of the knowledge, this circumstance is,
I think, irrelevant to the general question with which we are concerned,
namely What sort of response to what sort of stimulus can be regarded
as displaying knowledge? There is one characteristic which the response
must have, namely, it must consist of voluntary movements. The need
of this characteristic is connected with the characteristic of
APPROPRIATENESS, which I do not wish to consider as yet. For the present
I wish only to obtain a clearer idea of the sort of ACCURACY that a
knowledge-response must have. It is clear from many instances that
accuracy, in other cases, may be purely mechanical. The most complete
form of accuracy consists in giving correct answers to questions, an
achievement in which calculating machines far surpass human beings. In
asking a question of a calculating machine, you must use its language:
you must not address it in English, any more than you would address
an Englishman in Chinese. But if you address it in the language it
understands, it will tell you what is 34521 times 19987, without a
moment's hesitation or a hint of inaccuracy. We do not say the machine
KNOWS the answer, because it has no purpose of its own in giving the
answer: it does not wish to impress you with its cleverness, or feel
proud of being such a good machine. But as far as mere accuracy goes,
the machine leaves nothing to be desired.

Accuracy of response is a perfectly clear notion in the case of answers
to questions, but in other cases it is much more obscure. We may say
generally that an object whether animate or inanimate, is "sensitive" to
a certain feature of the environment if it behaves differently according
to the presence or absence of that feature. Thus iron is sensitive to
anything magnetic. But sensitiveness does not constitute knowledge, and
knowledge of a fact which is not sensible is not sensitiveness to
that fact, as we have seen in distinguishing the fact known from the
stimulus. As soon as we pass beyond the simple case of question and
answer, the definition of knowledge by means of behaviour demands the
consideration of purpose. A carrier pigeon flies home, and so we say
it "knows" the way. But if it merely flew to some place at random, we
should not say that it "knew" the way to that place, any more than a
stone rolling down hill knows the way to the valley.

On the features which distinguish knowledge from accuracy of response in
general, not much can be said from a behaviourist point of view without
referring to purpose. But the necessity of SOMETHING besides accuracy of
response may be brought out by the following consideration: Suppose
two persons, of whom one believed whatever the other disbelieved,
and disbelieved whatever the other believed. So far as accuracy and
sensitiveness of response alone are concerned, there would be nothing to
choose between these two persons. A thermometer which went down for warm
weather and up for cold might be just as accurate as the usual kind; and
a person who always believes falsely is just as sensitive an instrument
as a person who always believes truly. The observable and practical
difference between them would be that the one who always believed
falsely would quickly come to a bad end. This illustrates once more that
accuracy of response to stimulus does not alone show knowledge, but must
be reinforced by appropriateness, i.e. suitability for realizing one's
purpose. This applies even in the apparently simple case of answering
questions: if the purpose of the answers is to deceive, their falsehood,
not their truth, will be evidence of knowledge. The proportion of
the combination of appropriateness with accuracy in the definition
of knowledge is difficult; it seems that both enter in, but that
appropriateness is only required as regards the general type of
response, not as regards each individual instance.

II. I have so far assumed as unquestionable the view that the truth or
falsehood of a belief consists in a relation to a certain fact,
namely the objective of the belief. This view has, however, been often
questioned. Philosophers have sought some intrinsic criterion by which
true and false beliefs could be distinguished.* I am afraid their chief
reason for this search has been the wish to feel more certainty than
seems otherwise possible as to what is true and what is false. If
we could discover the truth of a belief by examining its intrinsic
characteristics, or those of some collection of beliefs of which it
forms part, the pursuit of truth, it is thought, would be a less arduous
business than it otherwise appears to be. But the attempts which
have been made in this direction are not encouraging. I will take two
criteria which have been suggested, namely, (1) self-evidence, (2)
mutual coherence. If we can show that these are inadequate, we may
feel fairly certain that no intrinsic criterion hitherto suggested will
suffice to distinguish true from false beliefs.

     * The view that such a criterion exists is generally held by
     those whose views are in any degree derived from Hegel. It
     may be illustrated by the following passage from Lossky,
     "The Intuitive Basis of Knowledge" (Macmillan, 1919), p.
     268: "Strictly speaking, a false judgment is not a judgment
     at all. The predicate does not follow from the subject S
     alone, but from the subject plus a certain addition C, WHICH
     IN NO SENSE BELONGS TO THE CONTENT OF THE JUDGMENT. What
     takes place may be a process of association of ideas, of
     imagining, or the like, but is not a process of judging. An
     experienced psychologist will be able by careful observation
     to detect that in this process there is wanting just the
     specific element of the objective dependence of the
     predicate upon the subject which is characteristic of a
     judgment. It must be admitted, however, that an exceptional
     power of observation is needed in order to distinguish, by
     means of introspection, mere combination of ideas from
     judgments."


(1) Self-evidence.--Some of our beliefs seem to be peculiarly
indubitable. One might instance the belief that two and two are four,
that two things cannot be in the same place at the same time, nor one
thing in two places, or that a particular buttercup that we are seeing
is yellow. The suggestion we are to examine is that such: beliefs have
some recognizable quality which secures their truth, and the truth of
whatever is deduced from them according to self-evident principles of
inference. This theory is set forth, for example, by Meinong in his
book, "Ueber die Erfahrungsgrundlagen unseres Wissens."

If this theory is to be logically tenable, self-evidence must not
consist merely in the fact that we believe a proposition. We believe
that our beliefs are sometimes erroneous, and we wish to be able to
select a certain class of beliefs which are never erroneous. If we
are to do this, it must be by some mark which belongs only to certain
beliefs, not to all; and among those to which it belongs there must be
none that are mutually inconsistent. If, for example, two propositions
p and q were self-evident, and it were also self-evident that p and q
could not both be true, that would condemn self-evidence as a guarantee
of truth. Again, self-evidence must not be the same thing as the absence
of doubt or the presence of complete certainty. If we are completely
certain of a proposition, we do not seek a ground to support our belief.
If self-evidence is alleged as a ground of belief, that implies that
doubt has crept in, and that our self-evident proposition has not
wholly resisted the assaults of scepticism. To say that any given person
believes some things so firmly that he cannot be made to doubt them is
no doubt true. Such beliefs he will be willing to use as premisses in
reasoning, and to him personally they will seem to have as much evidence
as any belief can need. But among the propositions which one man finds
indubitable there will be some that another man finds it quite possible
to doubt. It used to seem self-evident that there could not be men at
the Antipodes, because they would fall off, or at best grow giddy from
standing on their heads. But New Zealanders find the falsehood of this
proposition self-evident. Therefore, if self-evidence is a guarantee of
truth, our ancestors must have been mistaken in thinking their beliefs
about the Antipodes self-evident. Meinong meets this difficulty by
saying that some beliefs are falsely thought to be self-evident, but in
the case of others it is self-evident that they are self-evident, and
these are wholly reliable. Even this, however, does not remove the
practical risk of error, since we may mistakenly believe it self-evident
that a certain belief is self-evident. To remove all risk of error, we
shall need an endless series of more and more complicated self-evident
beliefs, which cannot possibly be realized in practice. It would seem,
therefore, that self-evidence is useless as a practical criterion for
insuring truth.

The same result follows from examining instances. If we take the four
instances mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, we shall
find that three of them are logical, while the fourth is a judgment of
perception. The proposition that two and two are four follows by purely
logical deduction from definitions: that means that its truth results,
not from the properties of objects, but from the meanings of symbols.
Now symbols, in mathematics, mean what we choose; thus the feeling of
self-evidence, in this case, seems explicable by the fact that the whole
matter is within our control. I do not wish to assert that this is
the whole truth about mathematical propositions, for the question is
complicated, and I do not know what the whole truth is. But I do wish to
suggest that the feeling of self-evidence in mathematical propositions
has to do with the fact that they are concerned with the meanings of
symbols, not with properties of the world such as external observation
might reveal.

Similar considerations apply to the impossibility of a thing being in
two places at once, or of two things being in one place at the same
time. These impossibilities result logically, if I am not mistaken, from
the definitions of one thing and one place. That is to say, they are not
laws of physics, but only part of the intellectual apparatus which we
have manufactured for manipulating physics. Their self-evidence, if this
is so, lies merely in the fact that they represent our decision as to
the use of words, not a property of physical objects.

Judgments of perception, such as "this buttercup is yellow," are in
a quite different position from judgments of logic, and their
self-evidence must have a different explanation. In order to arrive at
the nucleus of such a judgment, we will eliminate, as far as possible,
the use of words which take us beyond the present fact, such as
"buttercup" and "yellow." The simplest kind of judgment underlying the
perception that a buttercup is yellow would seem to be the perception of
similarity in two colours seen simultaneously. Suppose we are seeing
two buttercups, and we perceive that their colours are similar. This
similarity is a physical fact, not a matter of symbols or words; and it
certainly seems to be indubitable in a way that many judgments are not.

The first thing to observe, in regard to such judgments, is that as they
stand they are vague. The word "similar" is a vague word, since there
are degrees of similarity, and no one can say where similarity ends
and dissimilarity begins. It is unlikely that our two buttercups have
EXACTLY the same colour, and if we judged that they had we should have
passed altogether outside the region of self-evidence. To make our
proposition more precise, let us suppose that we are also seeing a
red rose at the same time. Then we may judge that the colours of the
buttercups are more similar to each other than to the colour of the
rose. This judgment seems more complicated, but has certainly gained
in precision. Even now, however, it falls short of complete precision,
since similarity is not prima facie measurable, and it would require
much discussion to decide what we mean by greater or less similarity. To
this process of the pursuit of precision there is strictly no limit.

The next thing to observe (although I do not personally doubt that most
of our judgments of perception are true) is that it is very difficult to
define any class of such judgments which can be known, by its intrinsic
quality, to be always exempt from error. Most of our judgments of
perception involve correlations, as when we judge that a certain noise
is that of a passing cart. Such judgments are all obviously liable to
error, since there is no correlation of which we have a right to be
certain that it is invariable. Other judgments of perception are derived
from recognition, as when we say "this is a buttercup," or even merely
"this is yellow." All such judgments entail some risk of error,
though sometimes perhaps a very small one; some flowers that look like
buttercups are marigolds, and colours that some would call yellow others
might call orange. Our subjective certainty is usually a result of
habit, and may lead us astray in circumstances which are unusual in ways
of which we are unaware.

For such reasons, no form of self-evidence seems to afford an absolute
criterion of truth. Nevertheless, it is perhaps true that judgments
having a high degree of subjective certainty are more apt to be true
than other judgments. But if this be the case, it is a result to be
demonstrated, not a premiss from which to start in defining truth and
falsehood. As an initial guarantee, therefore, neither self-evidence nor
subjective certainty can be accepted as adequate.

(2) Coherence.--Coherence as the definition of truth is advocated by
idealists, particularly by those who in the main follow Hegel. It is set
forth ably in Mr. Joachim's book, "The Nature of Truth" (Oxford, 1906).
According to this view, any set of propositions other than the whole
of truth can be condemned on purely logical grounds, as internally
inconsistent; a single proposition, if it is what we should ordinarily
call false, contradicts itself irremediably, while if it is what we
should ordinarily call true, it has implications which compel us to
admit other propositions, which in turn lead to others, and so on, until
we find ourselves committed to the whole of truth. One might illustrate
by a very simple example: if I say "so-and-so is a married man," that
is not a self-subsistent proposition. We cannot logically conceive of a
universe in which this proposition constituted the whole of truth. There
must be also someone who is a married woman, and who is married to
the particular man in question. The view we are considering regards
everything that can be said about any one object as relative in the same
sort of way as "so-and-so is a married man." But everything, according
to this view, is relative, not to one or two other things, but to all
other things, so that from one bit of truth the whole can be inferred.

The fundamental objection to this view is logical, and consists in a
criticism of its doctrine as to relations. I shall omit this line of
argument, which I have developed elsewhere.* For the moment I will
content myself with saying that the powers of logic seem to me very
much less than this theory supposes. If it were taken seriously, its
advocates ought to profess that any one truth is logically inferable
from any other, and that, for example, the fact that Caesar conquered
Gaul, if adequately considered, would enable us to discover what the
weather will be to-morrow. No such claim is put forward in practice, and
the necessity of empirical observation is not denied; but according to
the theory it ought to be.

     * In the article on "The Monistic Theory of Truth" in
     "Philosophical Essays" (Longmans, 1910), reprinted from the
     "Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society," 1906-7.

Another objection is that no endeavour is made to show that we cannot
form a consistent whole composed partly or wholly of false propositions,
as in a novel. Leibniz's conception of many possible worlds seems to
accord much better with modern logic and with the practical empiricism
which is now universal. The attempt to deduce the world by pure thought
is attractive, and in former times was largely supposed capable of
success. But nowadays most men admit that beliefs must be tested by
observation, and not merely by the fact that they harmonize with other
beliefs. A consistent fairy-tale is a different thing from truth,
however elaborate it may be. But to pursue this topic would lead us
into difficult technicalities; I shall therefore assume, without further
argument, that coherence is not sufficient as a definition of truth.

III. Many difficult problems arise as regards the verifiability of
beliefs. We believe various things, and while we believe them we think
we know them. But it sometimes turns out that we were mistaken, or at
any rate we come to think we were. We must be mistaken either in our
previous opinion or in our subsequent recantation; therefore our beliefs
are not all correct, and there are cases of belief which are not cases
of knowledge. The question of verifiability is in essence this: can we
discover any set of beliefs which are never mistaken or any test which,
when applicable, will always enable us to discriminate between true
and false beliefs? Put thus broadly and abstractly, the answer must be
negative. There is no way hitherto discovered of wholly eliminating the
risk of error, and no infallible criterion. If we believe we have found
a criterion, this belief itself may be mistaken; we should be begging
the question if we tried to test the criterion by applying the criterion
to itself.

But although the notion of an absolute criterion is chimerical, there
may be relative criteria, which increase the probability of truth.
Common sense and science hold that there are. Let us see what they have
to say.

One of the plainest cases of verification, perhaps ultimately the only
case, consists in the happening of something expected. You go to the
station believing that there will be a train at a certain time; you
find the train, you get into it, and it starts at the expected time This
constitutes verification, and is a perfectly definite experience. It is,
in a sense, the converse of memory instead of having first sensations
and then images accompanied by belief, we have first images accompanied
by belief and then sensations. Apart from differences as to the
time-order and the accompanying feelings, the relation between image and
sensation is closely similar in the two cases of memory and expectation;
it is a relation of similarity, with difference as to causal
efficacy--broadly, the image has the psychological but not the physical
effects that the sensation would have. When an image accompanied by
an expectation-belief is thus succeeded by a sensation which is the
"meaning" of the image, we say that the expectation-belief has been
verified. The experience of verification in this sense is exceedingly
familiar; it happens every time that accustomed activities have results
that are not surprising, in eating and walking and talking and all our
daily pursuits.

But although the experience in question is common, it is not wholly easy
to give a theoretical account of it. How do we know that the sensation
resembles the previous image? Does the image persist in presence of the
sensation, so that we can compare the two? And even if SOME image does
persist, how do we know that it is the previous image unchanged? It does
not seem as if this line of inquiry offered much hope of a successful
issue. It is better, I think, to take a more external and causal view of
the relation of expectation to expected occurrence. If the occurrence,
when it comes, gives us the feeling of expectedness, and if the
expectation, beforehand, enabled us to act in a way which proves
appropriate to the occurrence, that must be held to constitute the
maximum of verification. We have first an expectation, then a sensation
with the feeling of expectedness related to memory of the expectation.
This whole experience, when it occurs, may be defined as verification,
and as constituting the truth of the expectation. Appropriate action,
during the period of expectation, may be regarded as additional
verification, but is not essential. The whole process may be illustrated
by looking up a familiar quotation, finding it in the expected words,
and in the expected part of the book. In this case we can strengthen
the verification by writing down beforehand the words which we expect to
find.

I think all verification is ultimately of the above sort. We verify a
scientific hypothesis indirectly, by deducing consequences as to the
future, which subsequent experience confirms. If somebody were to doubt
whether Caesar had crossed the Rubicon, verification could only be
obtained from the future. We could proceed to display manuscripts to our
historical sceptic, in which it was said that Caesar had behaved in this
way. We could advance arguments, verifiable by future experience, to
prove the antiquity of the manuscript from its texture, colour, etc. We
could find inscriptions agreeing with the historian on other points,
and tending to show his general accuracy. The causal laws which our
arguments would assume could be verified by the future occurrence of
events inferred by means of them. The existence and persistence of
causal laws, it is true, must be regarded as a fortunate accident, and
how long it will continue we cannot tell. Meanwhile verification remains
often practically possible. And since it is sometimes possible, we
can gradually discover what kinds of beliefs tend to be verified by
experience, and what kinds tend to be falsified; to the former kinds
we give an increased degree of assent, to the latter kinds a diminished
degree. The process is not absolute or infallible, but it has been
found capable of sifting beliefs and building up science. It affords
no theoretical refutation of the sceptic, whose position must remain
logically unassailable; but if complete scepticism is rejected, it gives
the practical method by which the system of our beliefs grows gradually
towards the unattainable ideal of impeccable knowledge.

IV. I come now to the purely formal definition of the truth or falsehood
of a belief. For this definition it is necessary first of all to
consider the derivation of the objective reference of a proposition from
the meanings of its component words or images.

Just as a word has meaning, so a proposition has an objective reference.
The objective reference of a proposition is a function (in the
mathematical sense) of the meanings of its component words. But the
objective reference differs from the meaning of a word through the
duality of truth and falsehood. You may believe the proposition "to-day
is Tuesday" both when, in fact, to-day is Tuesday, and when to-day is
not Tuesday. If to-day is not Tuesday, this fact is the objective of
your belief that to-day is Tuesday. But obviously the relation of your
belief to the fact is different in this case from what it is in the case
when to-day is Tuesday. We may say, metaphorically, that when to-day is
Tuesday, your belief that it is Tuesday points TOWARDS the fact, whereas
when to-day is not Tuesday your belief points AWAY FROM the fact. Thus
the objective reference of a belief is not determined by the fact alone,
but by the direction of the belief towards or away from the fact.* If,
on a Tuesday, one man believes that it is Tuesday while another believes
that it is not Tuesday, their beliefs have the same objective, namely
the fact that it is Tuesday but the true belief points towards the fact
while the false one points away from it. Thus, in order to define the
reference of a proposition we have to take account not only of the
objective, but also of the direction of pointing, towards the objective
in the case of a true proposition and away from it in the case of a
false one.

     * I owe this way of looking at the matter to my friend
     Ludwig Wittgenstein.

This mode of stating the nature of the objective reference of a
proposition is necessitated by the circumstance that there are true and
false propositions, but not true and false facts. If to-day is Tuesday,
there is not a false objective "to-day is not Tuesday," which could be
the objective of the false belief "to-day is not Tuesday." This is the
reason why two beliefs which are each other's contradictories have the
same objective. There is, however, a practical inconvenience, namely
that we cannot determine the objective reference of a proposition,
according to this definition, unless we know whether the proposition
is true or false. To avoid this inconvenience, it is better to adopt
a slightly different phraseology, and say: The "meaning" of the
proposition "to-day is Tuesday" consists in pointing to the fact "to-day
is Tuesday" if that is a fact, or away from the fact "to-day is not
Tuesday" if that is a fact. The "meaning" of the proposition "to-day is
not Tuesday" will be exactly the opposite. By this hypothetical form
we are able to speak of the meaning of a proposition without knowing
whether it is true or false. According to this definition, we know the
meaning of a proposition when we know what would make it true and what
would make it false, even if we do not know whether it is in fact true
or false.

The meaning of a proposition is derivative from the meanings of its
constituent words. Propositions occur in pairs, distinguished (in
simple cases) by the absence or presence of the word "not." Two such
propositions have the same objective, but opposite meanings: when one is
true, the other is false, and when one is false, the other is true.

The purely formal definition of truth and falsehood offers little
difficulty. What is required is a formal expression of the fact that a
proposition is true when it points towards its objective, and false when
it points away from it, In very simple cases we can give a very simple
account of this: we can say that true propositions actually resemble
their objectives in a way in which false propositions do not. But for
this purpose it is necessary to revert to image-propositions instead of
word-propositions. Let us take again the illustration of a memory-image
of a familiar room, and let us suppose that in the image the window is
to the left of the door. If in fact the window is to the left of the
door, there is a correspondence between the image and the objective;
there is the same relation between the window and the door as between
the images of them. The image-memory consists of the image of the window
to the left of the image of the door. When this is true, the very same
relation relates the terms of the objective (namely the window and
the door) as relates the images which mean them. In this case the
correspondence which constitutes truth is very simple.

In the case we have just been considering the objective consists of
two parts with a certain relation (that of left-to-right), and the
proposition consists of images of these parts with the very same
relation. The same proposition, if it were false, would have a less
simple formal relation to its objective. If the image-proposition
consists of an image of the window to the left of an image of the door,
while in fact the window is not to the left of the door, the proposition
does not result from the objective by the mere substitution of images
for their prototypes. Thus in this unusually simple case we can say that
a true proposition "corresponds" to its objective in a formal sense in
which a false proposition does not. Perhaps it may be possible to modify
this notion of formal correspondence in such a way as to be more widely
applicable, but if so, the modifications required will be by no means
slight. The reasons for this must now be considered.

To begin with, the simple type of correspondence we have been exhibiting
can hardly occur when words are substituted for images, because, in
word-propositions, relations are usually expressed by words, which are
not themselves relations. Take such a proposition as "Socrates
precedes Plato." Here the word "precedes" is just as solid as the words
"Socrates" and "Plato"; it MEANS a relation, but is not a relation. Thus
the objective which makes our proposition true consists of TWO terms
with a relation between them, whereas our proposition consists of THREE
terms with a relation of order between them. Of course, it would be
perfectly possible, theoretically, to indicate a few chosen relations,
not by words, but by relations between the other words. "Socrates-Plato"
might be used to mean "Socrates precedes Plato"; "Plato-Socrates" might
be used to mean "Plato was born before Socrates and died after him"; and
so on. But the possibilities of such a method would be very limited. For
aught I know, there may be languages that use it, but they are not among
the languages with which I am acquainted. And in any case, in view of
the multiplicity of relations that we wish to express, no language could
advance far without words for relations. But as soon as we have words
for relations, word-propositions have necessarily more terms than the
facts to which they refer, and cannot therefore correspond so simply
with their objectives as some image-propositions can.

The consideration of negative propositions and negative facts introduces
further complications. An image-proposition is necessarily positive:
we can image the window to the left of the door, or to the right of the
door, but we can form no image of the bare negative "the window not to
the left of the door." We can DISBELIEVE the image-proposition expressed
by "the window to the left of the door," and our disbelief will be true
if the window is not to the left of the door. But we can form no image
of the fact that the window is not to the left of the door. Attempts
have often been made to deny such negative facts, but, for reasons which
I have given elsewhere,* I believe these attempts to be mistaken, and I
shall assume that there are negative facts.

     * "Monist," January, 1919, p. 42 ff.

Word-propositions, like image-propositions, are always positive facts.
The fact that Socrates precedes Plato is symbolized in English by the
fact that the word "precedes" occurs between the words "Socrates" and
"Plato." But we cannot symbolize the fact that Plato does not precede
Socrates by not putting the word "precedes" between "Plato" and
"Socrates." A negative fact is not sensible, and language, being
intended for communication, has to be sensible. Therefore we symbolize
the fact that Plato does not precede Socrates by putting the words "does
not precede" between "Plato" and "Socrates." We thus obtain a series of
words which is just as positive a fact as the series "Socrates precedes
Plato." The propositions asserting negative facts are themselves
positive facts; they are merely different positive facts from those
asserting positive facts.

We have thus, as regards the opposition of positive and negative, three
different sorts of duality, according as we are dealing with facts,
image-propositions, or word-propositions. We have, namely:

(1) Positive and negative facts;

(2) Image-propositions, which may be believed or disbelieved, but do
not allow any duality of content corresponding to positive and negative
facts;

(3) Word-propositions, which are always positive facts, but are of two
kinds: one verified by a positive objective, the other by a negative
objective.

Owing to these complications, the simplest type of correspondence is
impossible when either negative facts or negative propositions are
involved.

Even when we confine ourselves to relations between two terms which are
both imaged, it may be impossible to form an image-proposition in which
the relation of the terms is represented by the same relation of the
images. Suppose we say "Caesar was 2,000 years before Foch," we express
a certain temporal relation between Caesar and Foch; but we cannot allow
2,000 years to elapse between our image of Caesar and our image of Foch.
This is perhaps not a fair example, since "2,000 years before" is not a
direct relation. But take a case where the relation is direct, say, "the
sun is brighter than the moon." We can form visual images of sunshine
and moonshine, and it may happen that our image of the sunshine is
the brighter of the two, but this is by no means either necessary or
sufficient. The act of comparison, implied in our judgment, is something
more than the mere coexistence of two images, one of which is in fact
brighter than the other. It would take us too far from our main topic if
we were to go into the question what actually occurs when we make this
judgment. Enough has been said to show that the correspondence between
the belief and its objective is more complicated in this case than in
that of the window to the left of the door, and this was all that had to
be proved.

In spite of these complications, the general nature of the formal
correspondence which makes truth is clear from our instances. In the
case of the simpler kind of propositions, namely those that I call
"atomic" propositions, where there is only one word expressing a
relation, the objective which would verify our proposition, assuming
that the word "not" is absent, is obtained by replacing each word
by what it means, the word meaning a relation being replaced by this
relation among the meanings of the other words. For example, if the
proposition is "Socrates precedes Plato," the objective which verifies
it results from replacing the word "Socrates" by Socrates, the word
"Plato" by Plato, and the word "precedes" by the relation of preceding
between Socrates and Plato. If the result of this process is a fact,
the proposition is true; if not, it is false. When our proposition is
"Socrates does not precede Plato," the conditions of truth and falsehood
are exactly reversed. More complicated propositions can be dealt with on
the same lines. In fact, the purely formal question, which has occupied
us in this last section, offers no very formidable difficulties.

I do not believe that the above formal theory is untrue, but I do
believe that it is inadequate. It does not, for example, throw any
light upon our preference for true beliefs rather than false ones. This
preference is only explicable by taking account of the causal efficacy
of beliefs, and of the greater appropriateness of the responses
resulting from true beliefs. But appropriateness depends upon purpose,
and purpose thus becomes a vital part of theory of knowledge.




LECTURE XIV. EMOTIONS AND WILL

On the two subjects of the present lecture I have nothing original to
say, and I am treating them only in order to complete the discussion of
my main thesis, namely that all psychic phenomena are built up out of
sensations and images alone.

Emotions are traditionally regarded by psychologists as a separate
class of mental occurrences: I am, of course, not concerned to deny
the obvious fact that they have characteristics which make a special
investigation of them necessary. What I am concerned with is the
analysis of emotions. It is clear that an emotion is essentially
complex, and we have to inquire whether it ever contains any
non-physiological material not reducible to sensations and images and
their relations.

Although what specially concerns us is the analysis of emotions, we
shall find that the more important topic is the physiological causation
of emotions. This is a subject upon which much valuable and exceedingly
interesting work has been done, whereas the bare analysis of emotions
has proved somewhat barren. In view of the fact that we have defined
perceptions, sensations, and images by their physiological causation, it
is evident that our problem of the analysis of the emotions is bound up
with the problem of their physiological causation.

Modern views on the causation of emotions begin with what is called
the James-Lange theory. James states this view in the following terms
("Psychology," vol. ii, p. 449):

"Our natural way of thinking about these coarser emotions, grief, fear,
rage, love, is that the mental perception of some fact excites the
mental affection called the emotion, and that this latter state of mind
gives rise to the bodily expression. My theory, on the contrary, is that
THE BODILY CHANGES FOLLOW DIRECTLY THE PERCEPTION OF THE EXCITING FACT,
AND THAT OUR FEELING OF THE SAME CHANGES AS THEY OCCUR _IS_ THE EMOTION
(James's italics). Common sense says: we lose our fortune, are sorry
and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we are insulted by
a rival, are angry and strike. The hypothesis here to be defended says
that this order of sequence is incorrect, that the one mental state is
not immediately induced by the other, that the bodily manifestations
must first be interposed between, and that the more rational statement
is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid
because we tremble, and not that we cry, strike, or tremble, because
we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be. Without the bodily
states following on the perception, the latter would be purely cognitive
in form, pale, colourless, destitute of emotional warmth."

Round this hypothesis a very voluminous literature has grown up. The
history of its victory over earlier criticism, and its difficulties with
the modern experimental work of Sherrington and Cannon, is well told
by James R. Angell in an article called "A Reconsideration of James's
Theory of Emotion in the Light of Recent Criticisms."* In this article
Angell defends James's theory and to me--though I speak with diffidence
on a question as to which I have little competence--it appears that his
defence is on the whole successful.

     * "Psychological Review," 1916.

Sherrington, by experiments on dogs, showed that many of the usual marks
of emotion were present in their behaviour even when, by severing the
spinal cord in the lower cervical region, the viscera were cut off from
all communication with the brain, except that existing through certain
cranial nerves. He mentions the various signs which "contributed to
indicate the existence of an emotion as lively as the animal had ever
shown us before the spinal operation had been made."* He infers that
the physiological condition of the viscera cannot be the cause of the
emotion displayed under such circumstances, and concludes: "We are
forced back toward the likelihood that the visceral expression of
emotion is SECONDARY to the cerebral action occurring with the psychical
state.... We may with James accept visceral and organic sensations
and the memories and associations of them as contributory to primitive
emotion, but we must regard them as re-enforcing rather than as
initiating the psychosis."*

     * Quoted by Angell, loc. cit.


Angell suggests that the display of emotion in such cases may be due
to past experience, generating habits which would require only the
stimulation of cerebral reflex arcs. Rage and some forms of fear,
however, may, he thinks, gain expression without the brain. Rage and
fear have been especially studied by Cannon, whose work is of the
greatest importance. His results are given in his book, "Bodily Changes
in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage" (D. Appleton and Co., 1916).

The most interesting part of Cannon's book consists in the investigation
of the effects produced by secretion of adrenin. Adrenin is a substance
secreted into the blood by the adrenal glands. These are among the
ductless glands, the functions of which, both in physiology and in
connection with the emotions, have only come to be known during recent
years. Cannon found that pain, fear and rage occurred in circumstances
which affected the supply of adrenin, and that an artificial injection
of adrenin could, for example, produce all the symptoms of fear. He
studied the effects of adrenin on various parts of the body; he found
that it causes the pupils to dilate, hairs to stand erect, blood vessels
to be constricted, and so on. These effects were still produced if
the parts in question were removed from the body and kept alive
artificially.*

     * Cannon's work is not unconnected with that of Mosso, who
     maintains, as the result of much experimental work, that
     "the seat of the emotions lies in the sympathetic nervous
     system." An account of the work of both these men will be
     found in Goddard's "Psychology of the Normal and Sub-normal"
     (Kegan Paul, 1919), chap. vii and Appendix.

Cannon's chief argument against James is, if I understand him rightly,
that similar affections of the viscera may accompany dissimilar
emotions, especially fear and rage. Various different emotions make
us cry, and therefore it cannot be true to say, as James does, that we
"feel sorry because we cry," since sometimes we cry when we feel glad.
This argument, however, is by no means conclusive against James, because
it cannot be shown that there are no visceral differences for different
emotions, and indeed it is unlikely that this is the case.

As Angell says (loc. cit.): "Fear and joy may both cause cardiac
palpitation, but in one case we find high tonus of the skeletal muscles,
in the other case relaxation and the general sense of weakness."

Angell's conclusion, after discussing the experiments of Sherrington
and Cannon, is: "I would therefore submit that, so far as concerns
the critical suggestions by these two psychologists, James's essential
contentions are not materially affected." If it were necessary for me to
take sides on this question, I should agree with this conclusion; but I
think my thesis as to the analysis of emotion can be maintained without
coming to a probably premature conclusion upon the doubtful parts of
the physiological problem.

According to our definitions, if James is right, an emotion may be
regarded as involving a confused perception of the viscera concerned
in its causation, while if Cannon and Sherrington are right, an emotion
involves a confused perception of its external stimulus. This follows
from what was said in Lecture VII. We there defined a perception as an
appearance, however irregular, of one or more objects external to the
brain. And in order to be an appearance of one or more objects, it is
only necessary that the occurrence in question should be connected
with them by a continuous chain, and should vary when they are varied
sufficiently. Thus the question whether a mental occurrence can be
called a perception turns upon the question whether anything can be
inferred from it as to its causes outside the brain: if such inference
is possible, the occurrence in question will come within our definition
of a perception. And in that case, according to the definition in
Lecture VIII, its non-mnemic elements will be sensations. Accordingly,
whether emotions are caused by changes in the viscera or by sensible
objects, they contain elements which are sensations according to our
definition.

An emotion in its entirety is, of course, something much more complex
than a perception. An emotion is essentially a process, and it will be
only what one may call a cross-section of the emotion that will be a
perception, of a bodily condition according to James, or (in certain
cases) of an external object according to his opponents. An emotion in
its entirety contains dynamic elements, such as motor impulses, desires,
pleasures and pains. Desires and pleasures and pains, according to the
theory adopted in Lecture III, are characteristics of processes, not
separate ingredients. An emotion--rage, for example--will be a certain
kind of process, consisting of perceptions and (in general) bodily
movements. The desires and pleasures and pains involved are properties
of this process, not separate items in the stuff of which the emotion
is composed. The dynamic elements in an emotion, if we are right in our
analysis, contain, from our point of view, no ingredients beyond those
contained in the processes considered in Lecture III. The ingredients
of an emotion are only sensations and images and bodily movements
succeeding each other according to a certain pattern. With this
conclusion we may leave the emotions and pass to the consideration of
the will.

The first thing to be defined when we are dealing with Will is a
VOLUNTARY MOVEMENT. We have already defined vital movements, and we have
maintained that, from a behaviourist standpoint, it is impossible to
distinguish which among such movements are reflex and which voluntary.
Nevertheless, there certainly is a distinction. When we decide in the
morning that it is time to get up, our consequent movement is voluntary.
The beating of the heart, on the other hand, is involuntary: we can
neither cause it nor prevent it by any decision of our own, except
indirectly, as e.g. by drugs. Breathing is intermediate between the two:
we normally breathe without the help of the will, but we can alter or
stop our breathing if we choose.

James ("Psychology," chap. xxvi) maintains that the only distinctive
characteristic of a voluntary act is that it involves an idea of the
movement to be performed, made up of memory-images of the kinaesthetic
sensations which we had when the same movement occurred on some former
occasion. He points out that, on this view, no movement can be made
voluntarily unless it has previously occurred involuntarily.*

     * "Psychology," Vol. ii, pp. 492-3.

I see no reason to doubt the correctness of this view. We shall say,
then, that movements which are accompanied by kinaesthetic sensations
tend to be caused by the images of those sensations, and when so caused
are called VOLUNTARY.

Volition, in the emphatic sense, involves something more than
voluntary movement. The sort of case I am thinking of is decision after
deliberation. Voluntary movements are a part of this, but not the whole.
There is, in addition to them, a judgment: "This is what I shall
do"; there is also a sensation of tension during doubt, followed by a
different sensation at the moment of deciding. I see no reason whatever
to suppose that there is any specifically new ingredient; sensations and
images, with their relations and causal laws, yield all that seems to
be wanted for the analysis of the will, together with the fact that
kinaesthetic images tend to cause the movements with which they are
connected. Conflict of desires is of course essential in the causation
of the emphatic kind of will: there will be for a time kinaesthetic
images of incompatible movements, followed by the exclusive image of
the movement which is said to be willed. Thus will seems to add no new
irreducible ingredient to the analysis of the mind.




LECTURE XV. CHARACTERISTICS OF MENTAL PHENOMENA

At the end of our journey it is time to return to the question from
which we set out, namely: What is it that characterizes mind as opposed
to matter? Or, to state the same question in other terms: How is
psychology to be distinguished from physics? The answer provisionally
suggested at the outset of our inquiry was that psychology and physics
are distinguished by the nature of their causal laws, not by their
subject matter. At the same time we held that there is a certain subject
matter, namely images, to which only psychological causal laws are
applicable; this subject matter, therefore, we assigned exclusively to
psychology. But we found no way of defining images except through
their causation; in their intrinsic character they appeared to have no
universal mark by which they could be distinguished from sensations.

In this last lecture I propose to pass in review various suggested
methods of distinguishing mind from matter. I shall then briefly sketch
the nature of that fundamental science which I believe to be the true
metaphysic, in which mind and matter alike are seen to be constructed
out of a neutral stuff, whose causal laws have no such duality as that
of psychology, but form the basis upon which both physics and psychology
are built.

In search for the definition of "mental phenomena," let us begin with
"consciousness," which is often thought to be the essence of mind.
In the first lecture I gave various arguments against the view that
consciousness is fundamental, but I did not attempt to say what
consciousness is. We must find a definition of it, if we are to feel
secure in deciding that it is not fundamental. It is for the sake of the
proof that it is not fundamental that we must now endeavour to decide
what it is.

"Consciousness," by those who regard it as fundamental, is taken to be a
character diffused throughout our mental life, distinct from sensations
and images, memories, beliefs and desires, but present in all of
them.* Dr. Henry Head, in an article which I quoted in Lecture III,
distinguishing sensations from purely physiological occurrences, says:
"Sensation, in the strict sense of the term, demands the existence of
consciousness." This statement, at first sight, is one to which we feel
inclined to assent, but I believe we are mistaken if we do so. Sensation
is the sort of thing of which we MAY be conscious, but not a thing
of which we MUST be conscious. We have been led, in the course of our
inquiry, to admit unconscious beliefs and unconscious desires. There is,
so far as I can see, no class of mental or other occurrences of which we
are always conscious whenever they happen.

     * Cf. Lecture VI.

The first thing to notice is that consciousness must be of something. In
view of this, I should define "consciousness" in terms of that relation
of an image of a word to an object which we defined, in Lecture XI, as
"meaning." When a sensation is followed by an image which is a "copy" of
it, I think it may be said that the existence of the image constitutes
consciousness of the sensation, provided it is accompanied by that sort
of belief which, when we reflect upon it, makes us feel that the image
is a "sign" of something other than itself. This is the sort of belief
which, in the case of memory, we expressed in the words "this occurred";
or which, in the case of a judgment of perception, makes us believe
in qualities correlated with present sensations, as e.g., tactile and
visual qualities are correlated. The addition of some element of belief
seems required, since mere imagination does not involve consciousness of
anything, and there can be no consciousness which is not of something.
If images alone constituted consciousness of their prototypes,
such imagination-images as in fact have prototypes would involve
consciousness of them; since this is not the case, an element of belief
must be added to the images in defining consciousness. The belief must
be of that sort that constitutes objective reference, past or
present. An image, together with a belief of this sort concerning it,
constitutes, according to our definition, consciousness of the prototype
of the image.

But when we pass from consciousness of sensations to consciousness of
objects of perception, certain further points arise which demand an
addition to our definition. A judgment of perception, we may say,
consists of a core of sensation, together with associated images, with
belief in the present existence of an object to which sensation and
images are referred in a way which is difficult to analyse. Perhaps we
might say that the belief is not fundamentally in any PRESENT existence,
but is of the nature of an expectation: for example, when we see an
object, we expect certain sensations to result if we proceed to touch
it. Perception, then, will consist of a present sensation together with
expectations of future sensations. (This, of course, is a reflective
analysis, not an account of the way perception appears to unchecked
introspection.) But all such expectations are liable to be erroneous,
since they are based upon correlations which are usual but not
invariable. Any such correlation may mislead us in a particular case,
for example, if we try to touch a reflection in a looking-glass under
the impression that it is "real." Since memory is fallible, a similar
difficulty arises as regards consciousness of past objects. It would
seem odd to say that we can be "conscious" of a thing which does not or
did not exist. The only way to avoid this awkwardness is to add to our
definition the proviso that the beliefs involved in consciousness must
be TRUE.

In the second place, the question arises as to whether we can be
conscious of images. If we apply our definition to this case, it seems
to demand images of images. In order, for example, to be conscious of
an image of a cat, we shall require, according to the letter of the
definition, an image which is a copy of our image of the cat, and has
this image for its prototype. Now, it hardly seems probable, as a matter
of observation, that there are images of images, as opposed to images
of sensations. We may meet this difficulty in two ways, either by boldly
denying consciousness of images, or by finding a sense in which, by
means of a different accompanying belief, an image, instead of meaning
its prototype, can mean another image of the same prototype.

The first alternative, which denies consciousness of images, has already
been discussed when we were dealing with Introspection in Lecture VI. We
then decided that there must be, in some sense, consciousness of images.
We are therefore left with the second suggested way of dealing with
knowledge of images. According to this second hypothesis, there may be
two images of the same prototype, such that one of them means the other,
instead of meaning the prototype. It will be remembered that we defined
meaning by association a word or image means an object, we said, when it
has the same associations as the object. But this definition must not be
interpreted too absolutely: a word or image will not have ALL the
same associations as the object which it means. The word "cat" may
be associated with the word "mat," but it would not happen except by
accident that a cat would be associated with a mat. And in like manner
an image may have certain associations which its prototype will not
have, e.g. an association with the word "image." When these associations
are active, an image means an image, instead of meaning its prototype.
If I have had images of a given prototype many times, I can mean one of
these, as opposed to the rest, by recollecting the time and place or any
other distinctive association of that one occasion. This happens, for
example, when a place recalls to us some thought we previously had in
that place, so that we remember a thought as opposed to the occurrence
to which it referred. Thus we may say that we think of an image A when
we have a similar image B associated with recollections of circumstances
connected with A, but not with its prototype or with other images of the
same prototype. In this way we become aware of images without the
need of any new store of mental contents, merely by the help of new
associations. This theory, so far as I can see, solves the problems of
introspective knowledge, without requiring heroic measures such as those
proposed by Knight Dunlap, whose views we discussed in Lecture VI.

According to what we have been saying, sensation itself is not an
instance of consciousness, though the immediate memory by which it is
apt to be succeeded is so. A sensation which is remembered becomes an
object of consciousness as soon as it begins to be remembered, which
will normally be almost immediately after its occurrence (if at all);
but while it exists it is not an object of consciousness. If, however,
it is part of a perception, say of some familiar person, we may say that
the person perceived is an object of consciousness. For in this case
the sensation is a SIGN of the perceived object in much the same way
in which a memory-image is a sign of a remembered object. The essential
practical function of "consciousness" and "thought" is that they enable
us to act with reference to what is distant in time or space, even
though it is not at present stimulating our senses. This reference
to absent objects is possible through association and habit. Actual
sensations, in themselves, are not cases of consciousness, because they
do not bring in this reference to what is absent. But their connection
with consciousness is very close, both through immediate memory, and
through the correlations which turn sensations into perceptions.

Enough has, I hope, been said to show that consciousness is far too
complex and accidental to be taken as the fundamental characteristic
of mind. We have seen that belief and images both enter into it. Belief
itself, as we saw in an earlier lecture, is complex. Therefore, if any
definition of mind is suggested by our analysis of consciousness, images
are what would naturally suggest themselves. But since we found
that images can only be defined causally, we cannot deal with this
suggestion, except in connection with the difference between physical
and psychological causal laws.

I come next to those characteristics of mental phenomena which arise out
of mnemic causation. The possibility of action with reference to what
is not sensibly present is one of the things that might be held to
characterize mind. Let us take first a very elementary example. Suppose
you are in a familiar room at night, and suddenly the light goes out.
You will be able to find your way to the door without much difficulty
by means of the picture of the room which you have in your mind. In this
case visual images serve, somewhat imperfectly it is true, the purpose
which visual sensations would otherwise serve. The stimulus to the
production of visual images is the desire to get out of the room, which,
according to what we found in Lecture III, consists essentially of
present sensations and motor impulses caused by them. Again, words heard
or read enable you to act with reference to the matters about which they
give information; here, again, a present sensible stimulus, in virtue of
habits formed in the past, enables you to act in a manner appropriate
to an object which is not sensibly present. The whole essence of the
practical efficiency of "thought" consists in sensitiveness to signs:
the sensible presence of A, which is a sign of the present or future
existence of B, enables us to act in a manner appropriate to B. Of
this, words are the supreme example, since their effects as signs are
prodigious, while their intrinsic interest as sensible occurrences on
their own account is usually very slight. The operation of signs may or
may not be accompanied by consciousness. If a sensible stimulus A calls
up an image of B, and we then act with reference to B, we have what may
be called consciousness of B. But habit may enable us to act in a manner
appropriate to B as soon as A appears, without ever having an image of
B. In that case, although A operates as a sign, it operates without the
help of consciousness. Broadly speaking, a very familiar sign tends to
operate directly in this manner, and the intervention of consciousness
marks an imperfectly established habit.

The power of acquiring experience, which characterizes men and animals,
is an example of the general law that, in mnemic causation, the causal
unit is not one event at one time, but two or more events at two or more
times.& A burnt child fears the fire, that is to say, the neighbourhood
of fire has a different effect upon a child which has had the sensations
of burning than upon one which has not. More correctly, the observed
effect, when a child which has been burnt is put near a fire, has for
its cause, not merely the neighbourhood of the fire, but this together
with the previous burning. The general formula, when an animal has
acquired experience through some event A, is that, when B occurs at some
future time, the animal to which A has happened acts differently from
an animal which A has not happened. Thus A and B together, not either
separately, must be regarded as the cause of the animal's behaviour,
unless we take account of the effect which A has had in altering the
animal's nervous tissue, which is a matter not patent to external
observation except under very special circumstances. With this
possibility, we are brought back to causal laws, and to the suggestion
that many things which seem essentially mental are really neural.
Perhaps it is the nerves that acquire experience rather than the mind.
If so, the possibility of acquiring experience cannot be used to define
mind.*

     * Cf. Lecture IV.

Very similar considerations apply to memory, if taken as the essence of
mind. A recollection is aroused by something which is happening now,
but is different from the effect which the present occurrence would
have produced if the recollected event had not occurred. This may be
accounted for by the physical effect of the past event on the brain,
making it a different instrument from that which would have resulted
from a different experience. The causal peculiarities of memory may,
therefore, have a physiological explanation. With every special class of
mental phenomena this possibility meets us afresh. If psychology is
to be a separate science at all, we must seek a wider ground for its
separateness than any that we have been considering hitherto.

We have found that "consciousness" is too narrow to characterize mental
phenomena, and that mnemic causation is too wide. I come now to a
characteristic which, though difficult to define, comes much nearer to
what we require, namely subjectivity.

Subjectivity, as a characteristic of mental phenomena, was considered in
Lecture VII, in connection with the definition of perception. We there
decided that those particulars which constitute the physical world can
be collected into sets in two ways, one of which makes a bundle of all
those particulars that are appearances of a given thing from different
places, while the other makes a bundle of all those particulars which
are appearances of different things from a given place. A bundle of
this latter sort, at a given time, is called a "perspective"; taken
throughout a period of time, it is called a "biography." Subjectivity is
the characteristic of perspectives and biographies, the characteristic
of giving the view of the world from a certain place. We saw in Lecture
VII that this characteristic involves none of the other characteristics
that are commonly associated with mental phenomena, such as
consciousness, experience and memory. We found in fact that it is
exhibited by a photographic plate, and, strictly speaking, by any
particular taken in conjunction with those which have the same "passive"
place in the sense defined in Lecture VII. The particulars forming one
perspective are connected together primarily by simultaneity;
those forming one biography, primarily by the existence of direct
time-relations between them. To these are to be added relations
derivable from the laws of perspective. In all this we are clearly not
in the region of psychology, as commonly understood; yet we are also
hardly in the region of physics. And the definition of perspectives
and biographies, though it does not yet yield anything that would
be commonly called "mental," is presupposed in mental phenomena, for
example in mnemic causation: the causal unit in mnemic causation, which
gives rise to Semon's engram, is the whole of one perspective--not of
any perspective, but of a perspective in a place where there is nervous
tissue, or at any rate living tissue of some sort. Perception also,
as we saw, can only be defined in terms of perspectives. Thus the
conception of subjectivity, i.e. of the "passive" place of a particular,
though not alone sufficient to define mind, is clearly an essential
element in the definition.

I have maintained throughout these lectures that the data of psychology
do not differ in, their intrinsic character from the data of physics.
I have maintained that sensations are data for psychology and
physics equally, while images, which may be in some sense exclusively
psychological data, can only be distinguished from sensations by their
correlations, not by what they are in themselves. It is now necessary,
however, to examine the notion of a "datum," and to obtain, if possible,
a definition of this notion.

The notion of "data" is familiar throughout science, and is usually
treated by men of science as though it were perfectly clear.
Psychologists, on the other hand, find great difficulty in the
conception. "Data" are naturally defined in terms of theory of
knowledge: they are those propositions of which the truth is known
without demonstration, so that they may be used as premisses in proving
other propositions. Further, when a proposition which is a datum asserts
the existence of something, we say that the something is a datum, as
well as the proposition asserting its existence. Thus those objects
of whose existence we become certain through perception are said to be
data.

There is some difficulty in connecting this epistemological definition
of "data" with our psychological analysis of knowledge; but until such
a connection has been effected, we have no right to use the conception
"data."

It is clear, in the first place, that there can be no datum apart from a
belief. A sensation which merely comes and goes is not a datum; it only
becomes a datum when it is remembered. Similarly, in perception, we do
not have a datum unless we have a JUDGMENT of perception. In the sense
in which objects (as opposed to propositions) are data, it would seem
natural to say that those objects of which we are conscious are data.
But consciousness, as we have seen, is a complex notion, involving
beliefs, as well as mnemic phenomena such as are required for perception
and memory. It follows that no datum is theoretically indubitable, since
no belief is infallible; it follows also that every datum has a greater
or less degree of vagueness, since there is always some vagueness in
memory and the meaning of images.

Data are not those things of which our consciousness is earliest in
time. At every period of life, after we have become capable of thought,
some of our beliefs are obtained by inference, while others are not.
A belief may pass from either of these classes into the other, and may
therefore become, or cease to be, a belief giving a datum. When, in what
follows, I speak of data, I do not mean the things of which we feel sure
before scientific study begins, but the things which, when a science
is well advanced, appear as affording grounds for other parts of
the science, without themselves being believed on any ground except
observation. I assume, that is to say, a trained observer, with an
analytic attention, knowing the sort of thing to look for, and the sort
of thing that will be important. What he observes is, at the stage of
science which he has reached, a datum for his science. It is just as
sophisticated and elaborate as the theories which he bases upon it,
since only trained habits and much practice enable a man to make
the kind of observation that will be scientifically illuminating.
Nevertheless, when once it has been observed, belief in it is not based
on inference and reasoning, but merely upon its having been seen. In
this way its logical status differs from that of the theories which are
proved by its means.

In any science other than psychology the datum is primarily a
perception, in which only the sensational core is ultimately and
theoretically a datum, though some such accretions as turn the sensation
into a perception are practically unavoidable. But if we postulate an
ideal observer, he will be able to isolate the sensation, and treat this
alone as datum. There is, therefore, an important sense in which we
may say that, if we analyse as much as we ought, our data, outside
psychology, consist of sensations, which include within themselves
certain spatial and temporal relations.

Applying this remark to physiology, we see that the nerves and brain
as physical objects are not truly data; they are to be replaced, in
the ideal structure of science, by the sensations through which the
physiologist is said to perceive them. The passage from these sensations
to nerves and brain as physical objects belongs really to the initial
stage in the theory of physics, and ought to be placed in the reasoned
part, not in the part supposed to be observed. To say we see the
nerves is like saying we hear the nightingale; both are convenient but
inaccurate expressions. We hear a sound which we believe to be causally
connected with the nightingale, and we see a sight which we believe
to be causally connected with a nerve. But in each case it is only
the sensation that ought, in strictness, to be called a datum. Now,
sensations are certainly among the data of psychology. Therefore all the
data of the physical sciences are also psychological data. It remains
to inquire whether all the data of psychology are also data of physical
science, and especially of physiology.

If we have been right in our analysis of mind, the ultimate data of
psychology are only sensations and images and their relations. Beliefs,
desires, volitions, and so on, appeared to us to be complex phenomena
consisting of sensations and images variously interrelated. Thus (apart
from certain relations) the occurrences which seem most distinctively
mental, and furthest removed from physics, are, like physical objects,
constructed or inferred, not part of the original stock of data in the
perfected science. From both ends, therefore, the difference between
physical and psychological data is diminished. Is there ultimately
no difference, or do images remain as irreducibly and exclusively
psychological? In view of the causal definition of the difference
between images and sensations, this brings us to a new question, namely:
Are the causal laws of psychology different from those of any other
science, or are they really physiological?

Certain ambiguities must be removed before this question can be
adequately discussed.

First, there is the distinction between rough approximate laws and
such as appear to be precise and general. I shall return to the former
presently; it is the latter that I wish to discuss now.

Matter, as defined at the end of Lecture V, is a logical fiction,
invented because it gives a convenient way of stating causal laws.
Except in cases of perfect regularity in appearances (of which we can
have no experience), the actual appearances of a piece of matter are not
members of that ideal system of regular appearances which is defined
as being the matter in question. But the matter is, after all, inferred
from its appearances, which are used to VERIFY physical laws. Thus, in
so far as physics is an empirical and verifiable science, it must assume
or prove that the inference from appearances to matter is, in general,
legitimate, and it must be able to tell us, more or less, what
appearances to expect. It is through this question of verifiability and
empirical applicability to experience that we are led to a theory of
matter such as I advocate. From the consideration of this question it
results that physics, in so far as it is an empirical science, not a
logical phantasy, is concerned with particulars of just the same sort
as those which psychology considers under the name of sensations. The
causal laws of physics, so interpreted, differ from those of psychology
only by the fact that they connect a particular with other appearances
in the same piece of matter, rather than with other appearances in the
same perspective. That is to say, they group together particulars having
the same "active" place, while psychology groups together those having
the same "passive" place. Some particulars, such as images, have no
"active" place, and therefore belong exclusively to psychology.

We can now understand the distinction between physics and psychology.
The nerves and brain are matter: our visual sensations when we look
at them may be, and I think are, members of the system constituting
irregular appearances of this matter, but are not the whole of the
system. Psychology is concerned, inter alia, with our sensations when we
see a piece of matter, as opposed to the matter which we see. Assuming,
as we must, that our sensations have physical causes, their causal laws
are nevertheless radically different from the laws of physics, since
the consideration of a single sensation requires the breaking up of
the group of which it is a member. When a sensation is used to verify
physics, it is used merely as a sign of a certain material phenomenon,
i.e. of a group of particulars of which it is a member. But when it is
studied by psychology, it is taken away from that group and put
into quite a different context, where it causes images or voluntary
movements. It is primarily this different grouping that is
characteristic of psychology as opposed to all the physical sciences,
including physiology; a secondary difference is that images, which
belong to psychology, are not easily to be included among the aspects
which constitute a physical thing or piece of matter.

There remains, however, an important question, namely: Are mental events
causally dependent upon physical events in a sense in which the converse
dependence does not hold? Before we can discuss the answer to this
question, we must first be clear as to what our question means.

When, given A, it is possible to infer B, but given B, it is not
possible to infer A, we say that B is dependent upon A in a sense in
which A is not dependent upon B. Stated in logical terms, this amounts
to saying that, when we know a many-one relation of A to B, B is
dependent upon A in respect of this relation. If the relation is a
causal law, we say that B is causally dependent upon A. The illustration
that chiefly concerns us is the system of appearances of a physical
object. We can, broadly speaking, infer distant appearances from near
ones, but not vice versa. All men look alike when they are a mile away,
hence when we see a man a mile off we cannot tell what he will look like
when he is only a yard away. But when we see him a yard away, we can
tell what he will look like a mile away. Thus the nearer view gives us
more valuable information, and the distant view is causally dependent
upon it in a sense in which it is not causally dependent upon the
distant view.

It is this greater causal potency of the near appearance that leads
physics to state its causal laws in terms of that system of regular
appearances to which the nearest appearances increasingly approximate,
and that makes it value information derived from the microscope or
telescope. It is clear that our sensations, considered as irregular
appearances of physical objects, share the causal dependence belonging
to comparatively distant appearances; therefore in our sensational life
we are in causal dependence upon physical laws.

This, however, is not the most important or interesting part of our
question. It is the causation of images that is the vital problem. We
have seen that they are subject to mnenic causation, and that mnenic
causation may be reducible to ordinary physical causation in nervous
tissue. This is the question upon which our attitude must turn towards
what may be called materialism. One sense of materialism is the view
that all mental phenomena are causally dependent upon physical phenomena
in the above-defined sense of causal dependence. Whether this is the
case or not, I do not profess to know. The question seems to me the
same as the question whether mnemic causation is ultimate, which we
considered without deciding in Lecture IV. But I think the bulk of the
evidence points to the materialistic answer as the more probable.

In considering the causal laws of psychology, the distinction between
rough generalizations and exact laws is important. There are many rough
generalizations in psychology, not only of the sort by which we
govern our ordinary behaviour to each other, but also of a more nearly
scientific kind. Habit and association belong among such laws. I will
give an illustration of the kind of law that can be obtained. Suppose a
person has frequently experienced A and B in close temporal contiguity,
an association will be established, so that A, or an image of A, tends
to cause an image of B. The question arises: will the association work
in either direction, or only from the one which has occurred earlier
to the one which has occurred later? In an article by Mr. Wohlgemuth,
called "The Direction of Associations" ("British Journal of Psychology,"
vol. v, part iv, March, 1913), it is claimed to be proved by experiment
that, in so far as motor memory (i.e. memory of movements) is concerned,
association works only from earlier to later, while in visual and
auditory memory this is not the case, but the later of two neighbouring
experiences may recall the earlier as well as the earlier the later.
It is suggested that motor memory is physiological, while visual and
auditory memory are more truly psychological. But that is not the point
which concerns us in the illustration. The point which concerns us
is that a law of association, established by purely psychological
observation, is a purely psychological law, and may serve as a sample
of what is possible in the way of discovering such laws. It is, however,
still no more than a rough generalization, a statistical average. It
cannot tell us what will result from a given cause on a given occasion.
It is a law of tendency, not a precise and invariable law such as those
of physics aim at being.

If we wish to pass from the law of habit, stated as a tendency or
average, to something more precise and invariable, we seem driven to the
nervous system. We can more or less guess how an occurrence produces a
change in the brain, and how its repetition gradually produces something
analogous to the channel of a river, along which currents flow more
easily than in neighbouring paths. We can perceive that in this way, if
we had more knowledge, the tendency to habit through repetition might
be replaced by a precise account of the effect of each occurrence
in bringing about a modification of the sort from which habit would
ultimately result. It is such considerations that make students of
psychophysiology materialistic in their methods, whatever they may be in
their metaphysics. There are, of course, exceptions, such as Professor
J. S. Haldane,* who maintains that it is theoretically impossible to
obtain physiological explanations of psychical phenomena, or physical
explanations of physiological phenomena. But I think the bulk of expert
opinion, in practice, is on the other side.

     *See his book, "The New Physiology and Other Addresses"
     (Charles Griffin & Co., 1919).

The question whether it is possible to obtain precise causal laws in
which the causes are psychological, not material, is one of detailed
investigation. I have done what I could to make clear the nature of the
question, but I do not believe that it is possible as yet to answer it
with any confidence. It seems to be by no means an insoluble question,
and we may hope that science will be able to produce sufficient grounds
for regarding one answer as much more probable than the other. But for
the moment I do not see how we can come to a decision.

I think, however, on grounds of the theory of matter explained in
Lectures V and VII, that an ultimate scientific account of what goes on
in the world, if it were ascertainable, would resemble psychology rather
than physics in what we found to be the decisive difference between
them. I think, that is to say, that such an account would not be content
to speak, even formally, as though matter, which is a logical fiction,
were the ultimate reality. I think that, if our scientific knowledge
were adequate to the task, which it neither is nor is likely to become,
it would exhibit the laws of correlation of the particulars constituting
a momentary condition of a material unit, and would state the causal
laws* of the world in terms of these particulars, not in terms of
matter. Causal laws so stated would, I believe, be applicable to
psychology and physics equally; the science in which they were stated
would succeed in achieving what metaphysics has vainly attempted, namely
a unified account of what really happens, wholly true even if not the
whole of truth, and free from all convenient fictions or unwarrantable
assumptions of metaphysical entities. A causal law applicable to
particulars would count as a law of physics if it could be stated in
terms of those fictitious systems of regular appearances which are
matter; if this were not the case, it would count as a law of psychology
if one of the particulars were a sensation or an image, i.e. were
subject to mnemic causation. I believe that the realization of the
complexity of a material unit, and its analysis into constituents
analogous to sensations, is of the utmost importance to philosophy, and
vital for any understanding of the relations between mind and matter,
between our perceptions and the world which they perceive. It is in this
direction, I am convinced, that we must look for the solution of many
ancient perplexities.

     * In a perfected science, causal laws will take the form of
     differential equations--or of finite-difference equations,
     if the theory of quanta should prove correct.

It is probable that the whole science of mental occurrences, especially
where its initial definitions are concerned, could be simplified by the
development of the fundamental unifying science in which the causal laws
of particulars are sought, rather than the causal laws of those systems
of particulars that constitute the material units of physics. This
fundamental science would cause physics to become derivative, in the
sort of way in which theories of the constitution of the atom make
chemistry derivative from physics; it would also cause psychology to
appear less singular and isolated among sciences. If we are right in
this, it is a wrong philosophy of matter which has caused many of the
difficulties in the philosophy of mind--difficulties which a right
philosophy of matter would cause to disappear.

The conclusions at which we have arrived may be summed up as follows:

I. Physics and psychology are not distinguished by their material. Mind
and matter alike are logical constructions; the particulars out of which
they are constructed, or from which they are inferred, have various
relations, some of which are studied by physics, others by psychology.
Broadly speaking, physics group particulars by their active places,
psychology by their passive places.

II. The two most essential characteristics of the causal laws which
would naturally be called psychological are SUBJECTIVITY and MNEMIC
CAUSATION; these are not unconnected, since the causal unit in mnemic
causation is the group of particulars having a given passive place at
a given time, and it is by this manner of grouping that subjectivity is
defined.

III. Habit, memory and thought are all developments of mnemic causation.
It is probable, though not certain, that mnemic causation is derivative
from ordinary physical causation in nervous (and other) tissue.

IV. Consciousness is a complex and far from universal characteristic of
mental phenomena.

V. Mind is a matter of degree, chiefly exemplified in number and
complexity of habits.

VI. All our data, both in physics and psychology, are subject to
psychological causal laws; but physical causal laws, at least in
traditional physics, can only be stated in terms of matter, which is
both inferred and constructed, never a datum. In this respect psychology
is nearer to what actually exists.
PREFACE


The following lectures[1] are an attempt to show, by means of examples,
the nature, capacity, and limitations of the logical-analytic method in
philosophy. This method, of which the first complete example is to be
found in the writings of Frege, has gradually, in the course of actual
research, increasingly forced itself upon me as something perfectly
definite, capable of embodiment in maxims, and adequate, in all branches
of philosophy, to yield whatever objective scientific knowledge it is
possible to obtain. Most of the methods hitherto practised have
professed to lead to more ambitious results than any that logical
analysis can claim to reach, but unfortunately these results have always
been such as many competent philosophers considered inadmissible.
Regarded merely as hypotheses and as aids to imagination, the great
systems of the past serve a very useful purpose, and are abundantly
worthy of study. But something different is required if philosophy is to
become a science, and to aim at results independent of the tastes and
temperament of the philosopher who advocates them. In what follows, I
have endeavoured to show, however imperfectly, the way by which I
believe that this _desideratum_ is to be found.

  [1] Delivered as Lowell Lectures in Boston, in March and April 1914.

The central problem by which I have sought to illustrate method is the
problem of the relation between the crude data of sense and the space,
time, and matter of mathematical physics. I have been made aware of the
importance of this problem by my friend and collaborator Dr Whitehead,
to whom are due almost all the differences between the views advocated
here and those suggested in _The Problems of Philosophy_.[2] I owe to
him the definition of points, the suggestion for the treatment of
instants and "things," and the whole conception of the world of physics
as a _construction_ rather than an _inference_. What is said on these
topics here is, in fact, a rough preliminary account of the more precise
results which he is giving in the fourth volume of our _Principia
Mathematica_.[3] It will be seen that if his way of dealing with these
topics is capable of being successfully carried through, a wholly new
light is thrown on the time-honoured controversies of realists and
idealists, and a method is obtained of solving all that is soluble in
their problem.

  [2] London and New York, 1912 ("Home University Library").

  [3] The first volume was published at Cambridge in 1910, the second in
  1912, and the third in 1913.

The speculations of the past as to the reality or unreality of the world
of physics were baffled, at the outset, by the absence of any
satisfactory theory of the mathematical infinite. This difficulty has
been removed by the work of Georg Cantor. But the positive and detailed
solution of the problem by means of mathematical constructions based
upon sensible objects as data has only been rendered possible by the
growth of mathematical logic, without which it is practically impossible
to manipulate ideas of the requisite abstractness and complexity. This
aspect, which is somewhat obscured in a merely popular outline such as
is contained in the following lectures, will become plain as soon as Dr
Whitehead's work is published. In pure logic, which, however, will be
very briefly discussed in these lectures, I have had the benefit of
vitally important discoveries, not yet published, by my friend Mr Ludwig
Wittgenstein.

Since my purpose was to illustrate method, I have included much that is
tentative and incomplete, for it is not by the study of finished
structures alone that the manner of construction can be learnt. Except
in regard to such matters as Cantor's theory of infinity, no finality is
claimed for the theories suggested; but I believe that where they are
found to require modification, this will be discovered by substantially
the same method as that which at present makes them appear probable, and
it is on this ground that I ask the reader to be tolerant of their
incompleteness.

  Cambridge,
    June 1914.




CONTENTS


  LECTURE                                                     PAGE

       I. Current Tendencies                                     3

      II. Logic as the Essence of Philosophy                    33

     III. On our Knowledge of the External World                63

      IV. The World of Physics and the World of Sense          101

       V. The Theory of Continuity                             129

      VI. The Problem of Infinity considered Historically      155

     VII. The Positive Theory of Infinity                      185

    VIII. On the Notion of Cause, with Applications to
             the Free-will Problem                             211

          Index                                                243




LECTURE I

CURRENT TENDENCIES


Philosophy, from the earliest times, has made greater claims, and
achieved fewer results, than any other branch of learning. Ever since
Thales said that all is water, philosophers have been ready with glib
assertions about the sum-total of things; and equally glib denials have
come from other philosophers ever since Thales was contradicted by
Anaximander. I believe that the time has now arrived when this
unsatisfactory state of things can be brought to an end. In the
following course of lectures I shall try, chiefly by taking certain
special problems as examples, to indicate wherein the claims of
philosophers have been excessive, and why their achievements have not
been greater. The problems and the method of philosophy have, I believe,
been misconceived by all schools, many of its traditional problems being
insoluble with our means of knowledge, while other more neglected but
not less important problems can, by a more patient and more adequate
method, be solved with all the precision and certainty to which the most
advanced sciences have attained.

Among present-day philosophies, we may distinguish three principal
types, often combined in varying proportions by a single philosopher,
but in essence and tendency distinct. The first of these, which I shall
call the classical tradition, descends in the main from Kant and Hegel;
it represents the attempt to adapt to present needs the methods and
results of the great constructive philosophers from Plato downwards. The
second type, which may be called evolutionism, derived its predominance
from Darwin, and must be reckoned as having had Herbert Spencer for its
first philosophical representative; but in recent times it has become,
chiefly through William James and M. Bergson, far bolder and far more
searching in its innovations than it was in the hands of Herbert
Spencer. The third type, which may be called "logical atomism" for want
of a better name, has gradually crept into philosophy through the
critical scrutiny of mathematics. This type of philosophy, which is the
one that I wish to advocate, has not as yet many whole-hearted
adherents, but the "new realism" which owes its inception to Harvard is
very largely impregnated with its spirit. It represents, I believe, the
same kind of advance as was introduced into physics by Galileo: the
substitution of piecemeal, detailed, and verifiable results for large
untested generalities recommended only by a certain appeal to
imagination. But before we can understand the changes advocated by this
new philosophy, we must briefly examine and criticise the other two
types with which it has to contend.


A. The Classical Tradition

Twenty years ago, the classical tradition, having vanquished the
opposing tradition of the English empiricists, held almost unquestioned
sway in all Anglo-Saxon universities. At the present day, though it is
losing ground, many of the most prominent teachers still adhere to it.
In academic France, in spite of M. Bergson, it is far stronger than all
its opponents combined; and in Germany it has many vigorous advocates.
Nevertheless, it represents on the whole a decaying force, and it has
failed to adapt itself to the temper of the age. Its advocates are, in
the main, those whose extra-philosophical knowledge is literary, rather
than those who have felt the inspiration of science. There are, apart
from reasoned arguments, certain general intellectual forces against
it--the same general forces which are breaking down the other great
syntheses of the past, and making our age one of bewildered groping
where our ancestors walked in the clear daylight of unquestioning
certainty.

The original impulse out of which the classical tradition developed was
the nave faith of the Greek philosophers in the omnipotence of
reasoning. The discovery of geometry had intoxicated them, and its _a
priori_ deductive method appeared capable of universal application. They
would prove, for instance, that all reality is one, that there is no
such thing as change, that the world of sense is a world of mere
illusion; and the strangeness of their results gave them no qualms
because they believed in the correctness of their reasoning. Thus it
came to be thought that by mere thinking the most surprising and
important truths concerning the whole of reality could be established
with a certainty which no contrary observations could shake. As the
vital impulse of the early philosophers died away, its place was taken
by authority and tradition, reinforced, in the Middle Ages and almost to
our own day, by systematic theology. Modern philosophy, from Descartes
onwards, though not bound by authority like that of the Middle Ages,
still accepted more or less uncritically the Aristotelian logic.
Moreover, it still believed, except in Great Britain, that _a priori_
reasoning could reveal otherwise undiscoverable secrets about the
universe, and could prove reality to be quite different from what, to
direct observation, it appears to be. It is this belief, rather than any
particular tenets resulting from it, that I regard as the distinguishing
characteristic of the classical tradition, and as hitherto the main
obstacle to a scientific attitude in philosophy.

The nature of the philosophy embodied in the classical tradition may be
made clearer by taking a particular exponent as an illustration. For
this purpose, let us consider for a moment the doctrines of Mr Bradley,
who is probably the most distinguished living representative of this
school. Mr Bradley's _Appearance and Reality_ is a book consisting of
two parts, the first called _Appearance_, the second _Reality_. The
first part examines and condemns almost all that makes up our everyday
world: things and qualities, relations, space and time, change,
causation, activity, the self. All these, though in some sense facts
which qualify reality, are not real as they appear. What is real is one
single, indivisible, timeless whole, called the Absolute, which is in
some sense spiritual, but does not consist of souls, or of thought and
will as we know them. And all this is established by abstract logical
reasoning professing to find self-contradictions in the categories
condemned as mere appearance, and to leave no tenable alternative to the
kind of Absolute which is finally affirmed to be real.

One brief example may suffice to illustrate Mr Bradley's method. The
world appears to be full of many things with various relations to each
other--right and left, before and after, father and son, and so on. But
relations, according to Mr Bradley, are found on examination to be
self-contradictory and therefore impossible. He first argues that, if
there are relations, there must be qualities between which they hold.
This part of his argument need not detain us. He then proceeds:

"But how the relation can stand to the qualities is, on the other side,
unintelligible. If it is nothing to the qualities, then they are not
related at all; and, if so, as we saw, they have ceased to be qualities,
and their relation is a nonentity. But if it is to be something to them,
then clearly we shall require a _new_ connecting relation. For the
relation hardly can be the mere adjective of one or both of its terms;
or, at least, as such it seems indefensible. And, being something
itself, if it does not itself bear a relation to the terms, in what
intelligible way will it succeed in being anything to them? But here
again we are hurried off into the eddy of a hopeless process, since we
are forced to go on finding new relations without end. The links are
united by a link, and this bond of union is a link which also has two
ends; and these require each a fresh link to connect them with the old.
The problem is to find how the relation can stand to its qualities, and
this problem is insoluble."[4]

  [4] _Appearance and Reality_, pp. 32-33.

I do not propose to examine this argument in detail, or to show the
exact points where, in my opinion, it is fallacious. I have quoted it
only as an example of method. Most people will admit, I think, that it
is calculated to produce bewilderment rather than conviction, because
there is more likelihood of error in a very subtle, abstract, and
difficult argument than in so patent a fact as the interrelatedness of
the things in the world. To the early Greeks, to whom geometry was
practically the only known science, it was possible to follow reasoning
with assent even when it led to the strangest conclusions. But to us,
with our methods of experiment and observation, our knowledge of the
long history of _a priori_ errors refuted by empirical science, it has
become natural to suspect a fallacy in any deduction of which the
conclusion appears to contradict patent facts. It is easy to carry such
suspicion too far, and it is very desirable, if possible, actually to
discover the exact nature of the error when it exists. But there is no
doubt that what we may call the empirical outlook has become part of
most educated people's habit of mind; and it is this, rather than any
definite argument, that has diminished the hold of the classical
tradition upon students of philosophy and the instructed public
generally.

The function of logic in philosophy, as I shall try to show at a later
stage, is all-important; but I do not think its function is that which
it has in the classical tradition. In that tradition, logic becomes
constructive through negation. Where a number of alternatives seem, at
first sight, to be equally possible, logic is made to condemn all of
them except one, and that one is then pronounced to be realised in the
actual world. Thus the world is constructed by means of logic, with
little or no appeal to concrete experience. The true function of logic
is, in my opinion, exactly the opposite of this. As applied to matters
of experience, it is analytic rather than constructive; taken _a
priori_, it shows the possibility of hitherto unsuspected alternatives
more often than the impossibility of alternatives which seemed _prim
facie_ possible. Thus, while it liberates imagination as to what the
world _may_ be, it refuses to legislate as to what the world _is_. This
change, which has been brought about by an internal revolution in logic,
has swept away the ambitious constructions of traditional metaphysics,
even for those whose faith in logic is greatest; while to the many who
regard logic as a chimera the paradoxical systems to which it has given
rise do not seem worthy even of refutation. Thus on all sides these
systems have ceased to attract, and even the philosophical world tends
more and more to pass them by.

One or two of the favourite doctrines of the school we are considering
may be mentioned to illustrate the nature of its claims. The universe,
it tells us, is an "organic unity," like an animal or a perfect work of
art. By this it means, roughly speaking, that all the different parts
fit together and co-operate, and are what they are because of their
place in the whole. This belief is sometimes advanced dogmatically,
while at other times it is defended by certain logical arguments. If it
is true, every part of the universe is a microcosm, a miniature
reflection of the whole. If we knew ourselves thoroughly, according to
this doctrine, we should know everything. Common sense would naturally
object that there are people--say in China--with whom our relations are
so indirect and trivial that we cannot infer anything important as to
them from any fact about ourselves. If there are living beings in Mars
or in more distant parts of the universe, the same argument becomes even
stronger. But further, perhaps the whole contents of the space and time
in which we live form only one of many universes, each seeming to itself
complete. And thus the conception of the necessary unity of all that is
resolves itself into the poverty of imagination, and a freer logic
emancipates us from the strait-waistcoated benevolent institution which
idealism palms off as the totality of being.

Another very important doctrine held by most, though not all, of the
school we are examining is the doctrine that all reality is what is
called "mental" or "spiritual," or that, at any rate, all reality is
dependent for its existence upon what is mental. This view is often
particularised into the form which states that the relation of knower
and known is fundamental, and that nothing can exist unless it either
knows or is known. Here again the same legislative function is ascribed
to _a priori_ argumentation: it is thought that there are contradictions
in an unknown reality. Again, if I am not mistaken, the argument is
fallacious, and a better logic will show that no limits can be set to
the extent and nature of the unknown. And when I speak of the unknown, I
do not mean merely what we personally do not know, but what is not known
to any mind. Here as elsewhere, while the older logic shut out
possibilities and imprisoned imagination within the walls of the
familiar, the newer logic shows rather what may happen, and refuses to
decide as to what _must_ happen.

The classical tradition in philosophy is the last surviving child of two
very diverse parents: the Greek belief in reason, and the medival
belief in the tidiness of the universe. To the schoolmen, who lived amid
wars, massacres, and pestilences, nothing appeared so delightful as
safety and order. In their idealising dreams, it was safety and order
that they sought: the universe of Thomas Aquinas or Dante is as small
and neat as a Dutch interior. To us, to whom safety has become monotony,
to whom the primeval savageries of nature are so remote as to become a
mere pleasing condiment to our ordered routine, the world of dreams is
very different from what it was amid the wars of Guelf and Ghibelline.
Hence William James's protest against what he calls the "block universe"
of the classical tradition; hence Nietzsche's worship of force; hence
the verbal bloodthirstiness of many quiet literary men. The barbaric
substratum of human nature, unsatisfied in action, finds an outlet in
imagination. In philosophy, as elsewhere, this tendency is visible; and
it is this, rather than formal argument, that has thrust aside the
classical tradition for a philosophy which fancies itself more virile
and more vital.


B. Evolutionism

Evolutionism, in one form or another, is the prevailing creed of our
time. It dominates our politics, our literature, and not least our
philosophy. Nietzsche, pragmatism, Bergson, are phases in its
philosophic development, and their popularity far beyond the circles of
professional philosophers shows its consonance with the spirit of the
age. It believes itself firmly based on science, a liberator of hopes,
an inspirer of an invigorating faith in human power, a sure antidote to
the ratiocinative authority of the Greeks and the dogmatic authority of
medival systems. Against so fashionable and so agreeable a creed it may
seem useless to raise a protest; and with much of its spirit every
modern man must be in sympathy. But I think that, in the intoxication of
a quick success, much that is important and vital to a true
understanding of the universe has been forgotten. Something of Hellenism
must be combined with the new spirit before it can emerge from the
ardour of youth into the wisdom of manhood. And it is time to remember
that biology is neither the only science, nor yet the model to which all
other sciences must adapt themselves. Evolutionism, as I shall try to
show, is not a truly scientific philosophy, either in its method or in
the problems which it considers. The true scientific philosophy is
something more arduous and more aloof, appealing to less mundane hopes,
and requiring a severer discipline for its successful practice.

Darwin's _Origin of Species_ persuaded the world that the difference
between different species of animals and plants is not the fixed,
immutable difference that it appears to be. The doctrine of natural
kinds, which had rendered classification easy and definite, which was
enshrined in the Aristotelian tradition, and protected by its supposed
necessity for orthodox dogma, was suddenly swept away for ever out of
the biological world. The difference between man and the lower animals,
which to our human conceit appears enormous, was shown to be a gradual
achievement, involving intermediate beings who could not with certainty
be placed either within or without the human family. The sun and planets
had already been shown by Laplace to be very probably derived from a
primitive more or less undifferentiated nebula. Thus the old fixed
landmarks became wavering and indistinct, and all sharp outlines were
blurred. Things and species lost their boundaries, and none could say
where they began or where they ended.

But if human conceit was staggered for a moment by its kinship with the
ape, it soon found a way to reassert itself, and that way is the
"philosophy" of evolution. A process which led from the amoeba to man
appeared to the philosophers to be obviously a progress--though whether
the amoeba would agree with this opinion is not known. Hence the cycle
of changes which science had shown to be the probable history of the
past was welcomed as revealing a law of development towards good in the
universe--an evolution or unfolding of an ideal slowly embodying itself
in the actual. But such a view, though it might satisfy Spencer and
those whom we may call Hegelian evolutionists, could not be accepted as
adequate by the more whole-hearted votaries of change. An ideal to which
the world continuously approaches is, to these minds, too dead and
static to be inspiring. Not only the aspirations, but the ideal too,
must change and develop with the course of evolution; there must be no
fixed goal, but a continual fashioning of fresh needs by the impulse
which is life and which alone gives unity to the process.

Ever since the seventeenth century, those whom William James described
as the "tender-minded" have been engaged in a desperate struggle with
the mechanical view of the course of nature which physical science seems
to impose. A great part of the attractiveness of the classical tradition
was due to the partial escape from mechanism which it provided. But now,
with the influence of biology, the "tender-minded" believe that a more
radical escape is possible, sweeping aside not merely the laws of
physics, but the whole apparently immutable apparatus of logic, with its
fixed concepts, its general principles, and its reasonings which seem
able to compel even the most unwilling assent. The older kind of
teleology, therefore, which regarded the End as a fixed goal, already
partially visible, towards which we were gradually approaching, is
rejected by M. Bergson as not allowing enough for the absolute dominion
of change. After explaining why he does not accept mechanism, he
proceeds:[5]

"But radical finalism is quite as unacceptable, and for the same reason.
The doctrine of teleology, in its extreme form, as we find it in Leibniz
for example, implies that things and beings merely realise a programme
previously arranged. But if there is nothing unforeseen, no invention or
creation in the universe, time is useless again. As in the mechanistic
hypothesis, here again it is supposed that _all is given_. Finalism thus
understood is only inverted mechanism. It springs from the same
postulate, with this sole difference, that in the movement of our finite
intellects along successive things, whose successiveness is reduced to a
mere appearance, it holds in front of us the light with which it claims
to guide us, instead of putting it behind. It substitutes the attraction
of the future for the impulsion of the past. But succession remains none
the less a mere appearance, as indeed does movement itself. In the
doctrine of Leibniz, time is reduced to a confused perception, relative
to the human standpoint, a perception which would vanish, like a rising
mist, for a mind seated at the centre of things.

"Yet finalism is not, like mechanism, a doctrine with fixed rigid
outlines. It admits of as many inflections as we like. The mechanistic
philosophy is to be taken or left: it must be left if the least grain of
dust, by straying from the path foreseen by mechanics, should show the
slightest trace of spontaneity. The doctrine of final causes, on the
contrary, will never be definitively refuted. If one form of it be put
aside, it will take another. Its principle, which is essentially
psychological, is very flexible. It is so extensible, and thereby so
comprehensive, that one accepts something of it as soon as one rejects
pure mechanism. The theory we shall put forward in this book will
therefore necessarily partake of finalism to a certain extent."

  [5] _Creative Evolution_, English translation, p. 41.

M. Bergson's form of finalism depends upon his conception of life. Life,
in his philosophy, is a continuous stream, in which all divisions are
artificial and unreal. Separate things, beginnings and endings, are mere
convenient fictions: there is only smooth, unbroken transition. The
beliefs of to-day may count as true to-day, if they carry us along the
stream; but to-morrow they will be false, and must be replaced by new
beliefs to meet the new situation. All our thinking consists of
convenient fictions, imaginary congealings of the stream: reality flows
on in spite of all our fictions, and though it can be lived, it cannot
be conceived in thought. Somehow, without explicit statement, the
assurance is slipped in that the future, though we cannot foresee it,
will be better than the past or the present: the reader is like the
child who expects a sweet because it has been told to open its mouth and
shut its eyes. Logic, mathematics, physics disappear in this philosophy,
because they are too "static"; what is real is an impulse and movement
towards a goal which, like the rainbow, recedes as we advance, and makes
every place different when we reach it from what it appeared to be at a
distance.

Now I do not propose at present to enter upon a technical examination of
this philosophy. At present I wish to make only two criticisms of
it--first, that its truth does not follow from what science has rendered
probable concerning the facts of evolution, and secondly, that the
motives and interests which inspire it are so exclusively practical, and
the problems with which it deals are so special, that it can hardly be
regarded as really touching any of the questions that to my mind
constitute genuine philosophy.

(1) What biology has rendered probable is that the diverse species arose
by adaptation from a less differentiated ancestry. This fact is in
itself exceedingly interesting, but it is not the kind of fact from
which philosophical consequences follow. Philosophy is general, and
takes an impartial interest in all that exists. The changes suffered by
minute portions of matter on the earth's surface are very important to
us as active sentient beings; but to us as philosophers they have no
greater interest than other changes in portions of matter elsewhere. And
if the changes on the earth's surface during the last few millions of
years appear to our present ethical notions to be in the nature of a
progress, that gives no ground for believing that progress is a general
law of the universe. Except under the influence of desire, no one would
admit for a moment so crude a generalisation from such a tiny selection
of facts. What does result, not specially from biology, but from all the
sciences which deal with what exists, is that we cannot understand the
world unless we can understand change and continuity. This is even more
evident in physics than it is in biology. But the analysis of change and
continuity is not a problem upon which either physics or biology throws
any light: it is a problem of a new kind, belonging to a different kind
of study. The question whether evolutionism offers a true or a false
answer to this problem is not, therefore, a question to be solved by
appeals to particular facts, such as biology and physics reveal. In
assuming dogmatically a certain answer to this question, evolutionism
ceases to be scientific, yet it is only in touching on this question
that evolutionism reaches the subject-matter of philosophy. Evolutionism
thus consists of two parts: one not philosophical, but only a hasty
generalisation of the kind which the special sciences might hereafter
confirm or confute; the other not scientific, but a mere unsupported
dogma, belonging to philosophy by its subject-matter, but in no way
deducible from the facts upon which evolution relies.

(2) The predominant interest of evolutionism is in the question of human
destiny, or at least of the destiny of Life. It is more interested in
morality and happiness than in knowledge for its own sake. It must be
admitted that the same may be said of many other philosophies, and that
a desire for the kind of knowledge which philosophy really can give is
very rare. But if philosophy is to become scientific--and it is our
object to discover how this can be achieved--it is necessary first and
foremost that philosophers should acquire the disinterested intellectual
curiosity which characterises the genuine man of science. Knowledge
concerning the future--which is the kind of knowledge that must be
sought if we are to know about human destiny--is possible within certain
narrow limits. It is impossible to say how much the limits may be
enlarged with the progress of science. But what is evident is that any
proposition about the future belongs by its subject-matter to some
particular science, and is to be ascertained, if at all, by the methods
of that science. Philosophy is not a short cut to the same kind of
results as those of the other sciences: if it is to be a genuine study,
it must have a province of its own, and aim at results which the other
sciences can neither prove nor disprove.

The consideration that philosophy, if there is such a study, must
consist of propositions which could not occur in the other sciences, is
one which has very far-reaching consequences. All the questions which
have what is called a human interest--such, for example, as the question
of a future life--belong, at least in theory, to special sciences, and
are capable, at least in theory, of being decided by empirical evidence.
Philosophers have too often, in the past, permitted themselves to
pronounce on empirical questions, and found themselves, as a result, in
disastrous conflict with well-attested facts. We must, therefore,
renounce the hope that philosophy can promise satisfaction to our
mundane desires. What it can do, when it is purified from all practical
taint, is to help us to understand the general aspects of the world and
the logical analysis of familiar but complex things. Through this
achievement, by the suggestion of fruitful hypotheses, it may be
indirectly useful in other sciences, notably mathematics, physics, and
psychology. But a genuinely scientific philosophy cannot hope to appeal
to any except those who have the wish to understand, to escape from
intellectual bewilderment. It offers, in its own domain, the kind of
satisfaction which the other sciences offer. But it does not offer, or
attempt to offer, a solution of the problem of human destiny, or of the
destiny of the universe.

Evolutionism, if what has been said is true, is to be regarded as a
hasty generalisation from certain rather special facts, accompanied by a
dogmatic rejection of all attempts at analysis, and inspired by
interests which are practical rather than theoretical. In spite,
therefore, of its appeal to detailed results in various sciences, it
cannot be regarded as any more genuinely scientific than the classical
tradition which it has replaced. How philosophy is to be rendered
scientific, and what is the true subject-matter of philosophy, I shall
try to show first by examples of certain achieved results, and then more
generally. We will begin with the problem of the physical conceptions of
space and time and matter, which, as we have seen, are challenged by the
contentions of the evolutionists. That these conceptions stand in need
of reconstruction will be admitted, and is indeed increasingly urged by
physicists themselves. It will also be admitted that the reconstruction
must take more account of change and the universal flux than is done in
the older mechanics with its fundamental conception of an indestructible
matter. But I do not think the reconstruction required is on Bergsonian
lines, nor do I think that his rejection of logic can be anything but
harmful. I shall not, however, adopt the method of explicit controversy,
but rather the method of independent inquiry, starting from what, in a
pre-philosophic stage, appear to be facts, and keeping always as close
to these initial data as the requirements of consistency will permit.

Although explicit controversy is almost always fruitless in philosophy,
owing to the fact that no two philosophers ever understand one another,
yet it seems necessary to say something at the outset in justification
of the scientific as against the mystical attitude. Metaphysics, from
the first, has been developed by the union or the conflict of these two
attitudes. Among the earliest Greek philosophers, the Ionians were more
scientific and the Sicilians more mystical.[6] But among the latter,
Pythagoras, for example, was in himself a curious mixture of the two
tendencies: the scientific attitude led him to his proposition on
right-angled triangles, while his mystic insight showed him that it is
wicked to eat beans. Naturally enough, his followers divided into two
sects, the lovers of right-angled triangles and the abhorrers of beans;
but the former sect died out, leaving, however, a haunting flavour of
mysticism over much Greek mathematical speculation, and in particular
over Plato's views on mathematics. Plato, of course, embodies both the
scientific and the mystical attitudes in a higher form than his
predecessors, but the mystical attitude is distinctly the stronger of
the two, and secures ultimate victory whenever the conflict is sharp.
Plato, moreover, adopted from the Eleatics the device of using logic to
defeat common sense, and thus to leave the field clear for mysticism--a
device still employed in our own day by the adherents of the classical
tradition.

  [6] _Cf._ Burnet, _Early Greek Philosophy_, pp. 85 ff.

The logic used in defence of mysticism seems to me faulty as logic, and
in a later lecture I shall criticise it on this ground. But the more
thorough-going mystics do not employ logic, which they despise: they
appeal instead directly to the immediate deliverance of their insight.
Now, although fully developed mysticism is rare in the West, some
tincture of it colours the thoughts of many people, particularly as
regards matters on which they have strong convictions not based on
evidence. In all who seek passionately for the fugitive and difficult
goods, the conviction is almost irresistible that there is in the world
something deeper, more significant, than the multiplicity of little
facts chronicled and classified by science. Behind the veil of these
mundane things, they feel, something quite different obscurely shimmers,
shining forth clearly in the great moments of illumination, which alone
give anything worthy to be called real knowledge of truth. To seek such
moments, therefore, is to them the way of wisdom, rather than, like the
man of science, to observe coolly, to analyse without emotion, and to
accept without question the equal reality of the trivial and the
important.

Of the reality or unreality of the mystic's world I know nothing. I have
no wish to deny it, nor even to declare that the insight which reveals
it is not a genuine insight. What I do wish to maintain--and it is here
that the scientific attitude becomes imperative--is that insight,
untested and unsupported, is an insufficient guarantee of truth, in
spite of the fact that much of the most important truth is first
suggested by its means. It is common to speak of an opposition between
instinct and reason; in the eighteenth century, the opposition was drawn
in favour of reason, but under the influence of Rousseau and the
romantic movement instinct was given the preference, first by those who
rebelled against artificial forms of government and thought, and then,
as the purely rationalistic defence of traditional theology became
increasingly difficult, by all who felt in science a menace to creeds
which they associated with a spiritual outlook on life and the world.
Bergson, under the name of "intuition," has raised instinct to the
position of sole arbiter of metaphysical truth. But in fact the
opposition of instinct and reason is mainly illusory. Instinct,
intuition, or insight is what first leads to the beliefs which
subsequent reason confirms or confutes; but the confirmation, where it
is possible, consists, in the last analysis, of agreement with other
beliefs no less instinctive. Reason is a harmonising, controlling force
rather than a creative one. Even in the most purely logical realms, it
is insight that first arrives at what is new.

Where instinct and reason do sometimes conflict is in regard to single
beliefs, held instinctively, and held with such determination that no
degree of inconsistency with other beliefs leads to their abandonment.
Instinct, like all human faculties, is liable to error. Those in whom
reason is weak are often unwilling to admit this as regards themselves,
though all admit it in regard to others. Where instinct is least liable
to error is in practical matters as to which right judgment is a help to
survival; friendship and hostility in others, for instance, are often
felt with extraordinary discrimination through very careful disguises.
But even in such matters a wrong impression may be given by reserve or
flattery; and in matters less directly practical, such as philosophy
deals with, very strong instinctive beliefs may be wholly mistaken, as
we may come to know through their perceived inconsistency with other
equally strong beliefs. It is such considerations that necessitate the
harmonising mediation of reason, which tests our beliefs by their mutual
compatibility, and examines, in doubtful cases, the possible sources of
error on the one side and on the other. In this there is no opposition
to instinct as a whole, but only to blind reliance upon some one
interesting aspect of instinct to the exclusion of other more
commonplace but not less trustworthy aspects. It is such onesidedness,
not instinct itself, that reason aims at correcting.

These more or less trite maxims may be illustrated by application to
Bergson's advocacy of "intuition" as against "intellect." There are, he
says, "two profoundly different ways of knowing a thing. The first
implies that we move round the object; the second that we enter into it.
The first depends on the point of view at which we are placed and on the
symbols by which we express ourselves. The second neither depends on a
point of view nor relies on any symbol. The first kind of knowledge may
be said to stop at the _relative_; the second, in those cases where it
is possible, to attain the _absolute_."[7] The second of these, which is
intuition, is, he says, "the kind of intellectual _sympathy_ by which
one places oneself within an object in order to coincide with what is
unique in it and therefore inexpressible" (p. 6). In illustration, he
mentions self-knowledge: "there is one reality, at least, which we all
seize from within, by intuition and not by simple analysis. It is our
own personality in its flowing through time--our self which endures"
(p. 8). The rest of Bergson's philosophy consists in reporting, through
the imperfect medium of words, the knowledge gained by intuition, and
the consequent complete condemnation of all the pretended knowledge
derived from science and common sense.

  [7] _Introduction to Metaphysics_, p. 1.

This procedure, since it takes sides in a conflict of instinctive
beliefs, stands in need of justification by proving the greater
trustworthiness of the beliefs on one side than of those on the other.
Bergson attempts this justification in two ways--first, by explaining
that intellect is a purely practical faculty designed to secure
biological success; secondly, by mentioning remarkable feats of instinct
in animals, and by pointing out characteristics of the world which,
though intuition can apprehend them, are baffling to intellect as he
interprets it.

Of Bergson's theory that intellect is a purely practical faculty
developed in the struggle for survival, and not a source of true
beliefs, we may say, first, that it is only through intellect that we
know of the struggle for survival and of the biological ancestry of man:
if the intellect is misleading, the whole of this merely inferred
history is presumably untrue. If, on the other hand, we agree with M.
Bergson in thinking that evolution took place as Darwin believed, then
it is not only intellect, but all our faculties, that have been
developed under the stress of practical utility. Intuition is seen at
its best where it is directly useful--for example, in regard to other
people's characters and dispositions. Bergson apparently holds that
capacity for this kind of knowledge is less explicable by the struggle
for existence than, for example, capacity for pure mathematics. Yet the
savage deceived by false friendship is likely to pay for his mistake
with his life; whereas even in the most civilised societies men are not
put to death for mathematical incompetence. All the most striking of his
instances of intuition in animals have a very direct survival value. The
fact is, of course, that both intuition and intellect have been
developed because they are useful, and that, speaking broadly, they are
useful when they give truth and become harmful when they give falsehood.
Intellect, in civilised man, like artistic capacity, has occasionally
been developed beyond the point where it is useful to the individual;
intuition, on the other hand, seems on the whole to diminish as
civilisation increases. Speaking broadly, it is greater in children than
in adults, in the uneducated than in the educated. Probably in dogs it
exceeds anything to be found in human beings. But those who find in
these facts a recommendation of intuition ought to return to running
wild in the woods, dyeing themselves with woad and living on hips and
haws.

Let us next examine whether intuition possesses any such infallibility
as Bergson claims for it. The best instance of it, according to him, is
our acquaintance with ourselves; yet self-knowledge is proverbially rare
and difficult. Most men, for example, have in their nature meannesses,
vanities, and envies of which they are quite unconscious, though even
their best friends can perceive them without any difficulty. It is true
that intuition has a convincingness which is lacking to intellect: while
it is present, it is almost impossible to doubt its truth. But if it
should appear, on examination, to be at least as fallible as intellect,
its greater subjective certainty becomes a demerit, making it only the
more irresistibly deceptive. Apart from self-knowledge, one of the most
notable examples of intuition is the knowledge people believe themselves
to possess of those with whom they are in love: the wall between
different personalities seems to become transparent, and people think
they see into another soul as into their own. Yet deception in such
cases is constantly practised with success; and even where there is no
intentional deception, experience gradually proves, as a rule, that the
supposed insight was illusory, and that the slower, more groping methods
of the intellect are in the long run more reliable.

Bergson maintains that intellect can only deal with things in so far as
they resemble what has been experienced in the past, while intuition has
the power of apprehending the uniqueness and novelty that always belong
to each fresh moment. That there is something unique and new at every
moment, is certainly true; it is also true that this cannot be fully
expressed by means of intellectual concepts. Only direct acquaintance
can give knowledge of what is unique and new. But direct acquaintance of
this kind is given fully in sensation, and does not require, so far as I
can see, any special faculty of intuition for its apprehension. It is
neither intellect nor intuition, but sensation, that supplies new data;
but when the data are new in any remarkable manner, intellect is much
more capable of dealing with them than intuition would be. The hen with
a brood of ducklings no doubt has intuitions which seem to place her
inside them, and not merely to know them analytically; but when the
ducklings take to the water, the whole apparent intuition is seen to be
illusory, and the hen is left helpless on the shore. Intuition, in fact,
is an aspect and development of instinct, and, like all instinct, is
admirable in those customary surroundings which have moulded the habits
of the animal in question, but totally incompetent as soon as the
surroundings are changed in a way which demands some non-habitual mode
of action.

The theoretical understanding of the world, which is the aim of
philosophy, is not a matter of great practical importance to animals, or
to savages, or even to most civilised men. It is hardly to be supposed,
therefore, that the rapid, rough and ready methods of instinct or
intuition will find in this field a favourable ground for their
application. It is the older kinds of activity, which bring out our
kinship with remote generations of animal and semi-human ancestors, that
show intuition at its best. In such matters as self-preservation and
love, intuition will act sometimes (though not always) with a swiftness
and precision which are astonishing to the critical intellect. But
philosophy is not one of the pursuits which illustrate our affinity with
the past: it is a highly refined, highly civilised pursuit, demanding,
for its success, a certain liberation from the life of instinct, and
even, at times, a certain aloofness from all mundane hopes and fears. It
is not in philosophy, therefore, that we can hope to see intuition at
its best. On the contrary, since the true objects of philosophy, and the
habits of thought demanded for their apprehension, are strange, unusual,
and remote, it is here, more almost than anywhere else, that intellect
proves superior to intuition, and that quick unanalysed convictions are
least deserving of uncritical acceptance.

Before embarking upon the somewhat difficult and abstract discussions
which lie before us, it will be well to take a survey of the hopes we
may retain and the hopes we must abandon. The hope of satisfaction to
our more human desires--the hope of demonstrating that the world has
this or that desirable ethical characteristic--is not one which, so far
as I can see, philosophy can do anything whatever to satisfy. The
difference between a good world and a bad one is a difference in the
particular characteristics of the particular things that exist in these
worlds: it is not a sufficiently abstract difference to come within the
province of philosophy. Love and hate, for example, are ethical
opposites, but to philosophy they are closely analogous attitudes
towards objects. The general form and structure of those attitudes
towards objects which constitute mental phenomena is a problem for
philosophy; but the difference between love and hate is not a difference
of form or structure, and therefore belongs rather to the special
science of psychology than to philosophy. Thus the ethical interests
which have often inspired philosophers must remain in the background:
some kind of ethical interest may inspire the whole study, but none must
obtrude in the detail or be expected in the special results which are
sought.

If this view seems at first sight disappointing, we may remind ourselves
that a similar change has been found necessary in all the other
sciences. The physicist or chemist is not now required to prove the
ethical importance of his ions or atoms; the biologist is not expected
to prove the utility of the plants or animals which he dissects. In
pre-scientific ages this was not the case. Astronomy, for example, was
studied because men believed in astrology: it was thought that the
movements of the planets had the most direct and important bearing upon
the lives of human beings. Presumably, when this belief decayed and the
disinterested study of astronomy began, many who had found astrology
absorbingly interesting decided that astronomy had too little human
interest to be worthy of study. Physics, as it appears in Plato's
_Timus_ for example, is full of ethical notions: it is an essential
part of its purpose to show that the earth is worthy of admiration. The
modern physicist, on the contrary, though he has no wish to deny that
the earth is admirable, is not concerned, as physicist, with its ethical
attributes: he is merely concerned to find out facts, not to consider
whether they are good or bad. In psychology, the scientific attitude is
even more recent and more difficult than in the physical sciences: it is
natural to consider that human nature is either good or bad, and to
suppose that the difference between good and bad, so all-important in
practice, must be important in theory also. It is only during the last
century that an ethically neutral science of psychology has grown up;
and here too ethical neutrality has been essential to scientific
success.

In philosophy, hitherto, ethical neutrality has been seldom sought and
hardly ever achieved. Men have remembered their wishes, and have judged
philosophies in relation to their wishes. Driven from the particular
sciences, the belief that the notions of good and evil must afford a key
to the understanding of the world has sought a refuge in philosophy. But
even from this last refuge, if philosophy is not to remain a set of
pleasing dreams, this belief must be driven forth. It is a commonplace
that happiness is not best achieved by those who seek it directly; and
it would seem that the same is true of the good. In thought, at any
rate, those who forget good and evil and seek only to know the facts are
more likely to achieve good than those who view the world through the
distorting medium of their own desires.

The immense extension of our knowledge of facts in recent times has had,
as it had in the Renaissance, two effects upon the general intellectual
outlook. On the one hand, it has made men distrustful of the truth of
wide, ambitious systems: theories come and go swiftly, each serving, for
a moment, to classify known facts and promote the search for new ones,
but each in turn proving inadequate to deal with the new facts when they
have been found. Even those who invent the theories do not, in science,
regard them as anything but a temporary makeshift. The ideal of an
all-embracing synthesis, such as the Middle Ages believed themselves to
have attained, recedes further and further beyond the limits of what
seems feasible. In such a world, as in the world of Montaigne, nothing
seems worth while except the discovery of more and more facts, each in
turn the deathblow to some cherished theory; the ordering intellect
grows weary, and becomes slovenly through despair.

On the other hand, the new facts have brought new powers; man's physical
control over natural forces has been increasing with unexampled
rapidity, and promises to increase in the future beyond all easily
assignable limits. Thus alongside of despair as regards ultimate theory
there is an immense optimism as regards practice: what man can _do_
seems almost boundless. The old fixed limits of human power, such as
death, or the dependence of the race on an equilibrium of cosmic forces,
are forgotten, and no hard facts are allowed to break in upon the dream
of omnipotence. No philosophy is tolerated which sets bounds to man's
capacity of gratifying his wishes; and thus the very despair of theory
is invoked to silence every whisper of doubt as regards the
possibilities of practical achievement.

In the welcoming of new fact, and in the suspicion of dogmatism as
regards the universe at large, the modern spirit should, I think, be
accepted as wholly an advance. But both in its practical pretensions and
in its theoretical despair it seems to me to go too far. Most of what is
greatest in man is called forth in response to the thwarting of his
hopes by immutable natural obstacles; by the pretence of omnipotence, he
becomes trivial and a little absurd. And on the theoretical side,
ultimate metaphysical truth, though less all-embracing and harder of
attainment than it appeared to some philosophers in the past, can, I
believe, be discovered by those who are willing to combine the
hopefulness, patience, and open-mindedness of science with something of
the Greek feeling for beauty in the abstract world of logic and for the
ultimate intrinsic value in the contemplation of truth.

The philosophy, therefore, which is to be genuinely inspired by the
scientific spirit, must deal with somewhat dry and abstract matters, and
must not hope to find an answer to the practical problems of life. To
those who wish to understand much of what has in the past been most
difficult and obscure in the constitution of the universe, it has great
rewards to offer--triumphs as noteworthy as those of Newton and Darwin,
and as important in the long run, for the moulding of our mental habits.
And it brings with it--as a new and powerful method of investigation
always does--a sense of power and a hope of progress more reliable and
better grounded than any that rests on hasty and fallacious
generalisation as to the nature of the universe at large. Many hopes
which inspired philosophers in the past it cannot claim to fulfil; but
other hopes, more purely intellectual, it can satisfy more fully than
former ages could have deemed possible for human minds.




LECTURE II

LOGIC AS THE ESSENCE OF PHILOSOPHY


The topics we discussed in our first lecture, and the topics we shall
discuss later, all reduce themselves, in so far as they are genuinely
philosophical, to problems of logic. This is not due to any accident,
but to the fact that every philosophical problem, when it is subjected
to the necessary analysis and purification, is found either to be not
really philosophical at all, or else to be, in the sense in which we are
using the word, logical. But as the word "logic" is never used in the
same sense by two different philosophers, some explanation of what I
mean by the word is indispensable at the outset.

Logic, in the Middle Ages, and down to the present day in teaching,
meant no more than a scholastic collection of technical terms and rules
of syllogistic inference. Aristotle had spoken, and it was the part of
humbler men merely to repeat the lesson after him. The trivial nonsense
embodied in this tradition is still set in examinations, and defended by
eminent authorities as an excellent "propdeutic," _i.e._ a training in
those habits of solemn humbug which are so great a help in later life.
But it is not this that I mean to praise in saying that all philosophy
is logic. Ever since the beginning of the seventeenth century, all
vigorous minds that have concerned themselves with inference have
abandoned the medival tradition, and in one way or other have widened
the scope of logic.

The first extension was the introduction of the inductive method by
Bacon and Galileo--by the former in a theoretical and largely mistaken
form, by the latter in actual use in establishing the foundations of
modern physics and astronomy. This is probably the only extension of the
old logic which has become familiar to the general educated public. But
induction, important as it is when regarded as a method of
investigation, does not seem to remain when its work is done: in the
final form of a perfected science, it would seem that everything ought
to be deductive. If induction remains at all, which is a difficult
question, it will remain merely as one of the principles according to
which deductions are effected. Thus the ultimate result of the
introduction of the inductive method seems not the creation of a new
kind of non-deductive reasoning, but rather the widening of the scope of
deduction by pointing out a way of deducing which is certainly not
syllogistic, and does not fit into the medival scheme.

The question of the scope and validity of induction is of great
difficulty, and of great importance to our knowledge. Take such a
question as, "Will the sun rise to-morrow?" Our first instinctive
feeling is that we have abundant reason for saying that it will, because
it has risen on so many previous mornings. Now, I do not myself know
whether this does afford a ground or not, but I am willing to suppose
that it does. The question which then arises is: What is the principle
of inference by which we pass from past sunrises to future ones? The
answer given by Mill is that the inference depends upon the law of
causation. Let us suppose this to be true; then what is the reason for
believing in the law of causation? There are broadly three possible
answers: (1) that it is itself known _a priori_; (2) that it is a
postulate; (3) that it is an empirical generalisation from past
instances in which it has been found to hold. The theory that causation
is known _a priori_ cannot be definitely refuted, but it can be rendered
very unplausible by the mere process of formulating the law exactly, and
thereby showing that it is immensely more complicated and less obvious
than is generally supposed. The theory that causation is a postulate,
_i.e._ that it is something which we choose to assert although we know
that it is very likely false, is also incapable of refutation; but it is
plainly also incapable of justifying any use of the law in inference. We
are thus brought to the theory that the law is an empirical
generalisation, which is the view held by Mill.

But if so, how are empirical generalisations to be justified? The
evidence in their favour cannot be empirical, since we wish to argue
from what has been observed to what has not been observed, which can
only be done by means of some known relation of the observed and the
unobserved; but the unobserved, by definition, is not known empirically,
and therefore its relation to the observed, if known at all, must be
known independently of empirical evidence. Let us see what Mill says on
this subject.

According to Mill, the law of causation is proved by an admittedly
fallible process called "induction by simple enumeration." This process,
he says, "consists in ascribing the nature of general truths to all
propositions which are true in every instance that we happen to know
of."[8] As regards its fallibility, he asserts that "the precariousness
of the method of simple enumeration is in an inverse ratio to the
largeness of the generalisation. The process is delusive and
insufficient, exactly in proportion as the subject-matter of the
observation is special and limited in extent. As the sphere widens, this
unscientific method becomes less and less liable to mislead; and the
most universal class of truths, the law of causation for instance, and
the principles of number and of geometry, are duly and satisfactorily
proved by that method alone, nor are they susceptible of any other
proof."[9]

  [8] _Logic_, book iii., chapter iii.,  2.

  [9] Book iii., chapter xxi.,  3.

In the above statement, there are two obvious lacun: (1) How is the
method of simple enumeration itself justified? (2) What logical
principle, if any, covers the same ground as this method, without being
liable to its failures? Let us take the second question first.

A method of proof which, when used as directed, gives sometimes truth
and sometimes falsehood--as the method of simple enumeration does--is
obviously not a valid method, for validity demands invariable truth.
Thus, if simple enumeration is to be rendered valid, it must not be
stated as Mill states it. We shall have to say, at most, that the data
render the result _probable_. Causation holds, we shall say, in every
instance we have been able to test; therefore it _probably_ holds in
untested instances. There are terrible difficulties in the notion of
probability, but we may ignore them at present. We thus have what at
least _may_ be a logical principle, since it is without exception. If a
proposition is true in every instance that we happen to know of, and if
the instances are very numerous, then, we shall say, it becomes very
probable, on the data, that it will be true in any further instance.
This is not refuted by the fact that what we declare to be probable does
not always happen, for an event may be probable on the data and yet not
occur. It is, however, obviously capable of further analysis, and of
more exact statement. We shall have to say something like this: that
every instance of a proposition[10] being true increases the probability
of its being true in a fresh instance, and that a sufficient number of
favourable instances will, in the absence of instances to the contrary,
make the probability of the truth of a fresh instance approach
indefinitely near to certainty. Some such principle as this is required
if the method of simple enumeration is to be valid.

  [10] Or rather a propositional function.

But this brings us to our other question, namely, how is our principle
known to be true? Obviously, since it is required to justify induction,
it cannot be proved by induction; since it goes beyond the empirical
data, it cannot be proved by them alone; since it is required to justify
all inferences from empirical data to what goes beyond them, it cannot
itself be even rendered in any degree probable by such data. Hence, _if_
it is known, it is not known by experience, but independently of
experience. I do not say that any such principle is known: I only say
that it is required to justify the inferences from experience which
empiricists allow, and that it cannot itself be justified
empirically.[11]

  [11] The subject of causality and induction will be discussed again in
  Lecture VIII.

A similar conclusion can be proved by similar arguments concerning any
other logical principle. Thus logical knowledge is not derivable from
experience alone, and the empiricist's philosophy can therefore not be
accepted in its entirety, in spite of its excellence in many matters
which lie outside logic.

Hegel and his followers widened the scope of logic in quite a different
way--a way which I believe to be fallacious, but which requires
discussion if only to show how their conception of logic differs from
the conception which I wish to advocate. In their writings, logic is
practically identical with metaphysics. In broad outline, the way this
came about is as follows. Hegel believed that, by means of _a priori_
reasoning, it could be shown that the world _must_ have various
important and interesting characteristics, since any world without these
characteristics would be impossible and self-contradictory. Thus what he
calls "logic" is an investigation of the nature of the universe, in so
far as this can be inferred merely from the principle that the universe
must be logically self-consistent. I do not myself believe that from
this principle alone anything of importance can be inferred as regards
the existing universe. But, however that may be, I should not regard
Hegel's reasoning, even if it were valid, as properly belonging to
logic: it would rather be an application of logic to the actual world.
Logic itself would be concerned rather with such questions as what
self-consistency is, which Hegel, so far as I know, does not discuss.
And though he criticises the traditional logic, and professes to replace
it by an improved logic of his own, there is some sense in which the
traditional logic, with all its faults, is uncritically and
unconsciously assumed throughout his reasoning. It is not in the
direction advocated by him, it seems to me, that the reform of logic is
to be sought, but by a more fundamental, more patient, and less
ambitious investigation into the presuppositions which his system shares
with those of most other philosophers.

The way in which, as it seems to me, Hegel's system assumes the ordinary
logic which it subsequently criticises, is exemplified by the general
conception of "categories" with which he operates throughout. This
conception is, I think, essentially a product of logical confusion, but
it seems in some way to stand for the conception of "qualities of
Reality as a whole." Mr Bradley has worked out a theory according to
which, in all judgment, we are ascribing a predicate to Reality as a
whole; and this theory is derived from Hegel. Now the traditional logic
holds that every proposition ascribes a predicate to a subject, and from
this it easily follows that there can be only one subject, the Absolute,
for if there were two, the proposition that there were two would not
ascribe a predicate to either. Thus Hegel's doctrine, that philosophical
propositions must be of the form, "the Absolute is such-and-such,"
depends upon the traditional belief in the universality of the
subject-predicate form. This belief, being traditional, scarcely
self-conscious, and not supposed to be important, operates underground,
and is assumed in arguments which, like the refutation of relations,
appear at first sight such as to establish its truth. This is the most
important respect in which Hegel uncritically assumes the traditional
logic. Other less important respects--though important enough to be the
source of such essentially Hegelian conceptions as the "concrete
universal" and the "union of identity in difference"--will be found
where he explicitly deals with formal logic.[12]

  [12] See the translation by H. S. Macran, _Hegel's Doctrine of Formal
  Logic_, Oxford, 1912. Hegel's argument in this portion of his "Logic"
  depends throughout upon confusing the "is" of predication, as in
  "Socrates is mortal," with the "is" of identity, as in "Socrates is
  the philosopher who drank the hemlock." Owing to this confusion, he
  thinks that "Socrates" and "mortal" must be identical. Seeing that
  they are different, he does not infer, as others would, that there is
  a mistake somewhere, but that they exhibit "identity in difference."
  Again, Socrates is particular, "mortal" is universal. Therefore, he
  says, since Socrates is mortal, it follows that the particular is the
  universal--taking the "is" to be throughout expressive of identity.
  But to say "the particular is the universal" is self-contradictory.
  Again Hegel does not suspect a mistake but proceeds to synthesise
  particular and universal in the individual, or concrete universal.
  This is an example of how, for want of care at the start, vast and
  imposing systems of philosophy are built upon stupid and trivial
  confusions, which, but for the almost incredible fact that they are
  unintentional, one would be tempted to characterise as puns.

There is quite another direction in which a large technical development
of logic has taken place: I mean the direction of what is called
logistic or mathematical logic. This kind of logic is mathematical in
two different senses: it is itself a branch of mathematics, and it is
the logic which is specially applicable to other more traditional
branches of mathematics. Historically, it began as _merely_ a branch of
mathematics: its special applicability to other branches is a more
recent development. In both respects, it is the fulfilment of a hope
which Leibniz cherished throughout his life, and pursued with all the
ardour of his amazing intellectual energy. Much of his work on this
subject has been published recently, since his discoveries have been
remade by others; but none was published by him, because his results
persisted in contradicting certain points in the traditional doctrine of
the syllogism. We now know that on these points the traditional doctrine
is wrong, but respect for Aristotle prevented Leibniz from realising
that this was possible.[13]

  [13] _Cf._ Couturat, _La Logique de Leibniz_, pp. 361, 386.

The modern development of mathematical logic dates from Boole's _Laws of
Thought_ (1854). But in him and his successors, before Peano and Frege,
the only thing really achieved, apart from certain details, was the
invention of a mathematical symbolism for deducing consequences from the
premisses which the newer methods shared with those of Aristotle. This
subject has considerable interest as an independent branch of
mathematics, but it has very little to do with real logic. The first
serious advance in real logic since the time of the Greeks was made
independently by Peano and Frege--both mathematicians. They both arrived
at their logical results by an analysis of mathematics. Traditional
logic regarded the two propositions, "Socrates is mortal" and "All men
are mortal," as being of the same form;[14] Peano and Frege showed that
they are utterly different in form. The philosophical importance of
logic may be illustrated by the fact that this confusion--which is still
committed by most writers--obscured not only the whole study of the
forms of judgment and inference, but also the relations of things to
their qualities, of concrete existence to abstract concepts, and of the
world of sense to the world of Platonic ideas. Peano and Frege, who
pointed out the error, did so for technical reasons, and applied their
logic mainly to technical developments; but the philosophical importance
of the advance which they made is impossible to exaggerate.

  [14] It was often recognised that there was _some_ difference between
  them, but it was not recognised that the difference is fundamental,
  and of very great importance.

Mathematical logic, even in its most modern form, is not _directly_ of
philosophical importance except in its beginnings. After the beginnings,
it belongs rather to mathematics than to philosophy. Of its beginnings,
which are the only part of it that can properly be called
_philosophical_ logic, I shall speak shortly. But even the later
developments, though not directly philosophical, will be found of great
indirect use in philosophising. They enable us to deal easily with more
abstract conceptions than merely verbal reasoning can enumerate; they
suggest fruitful hypotheses which otherwise could hardly be thought of;
and they enable us to see quickly what is the smallest store of
materials with which a given logical or scientific edifice can be
constructed. Not only Frege's theory of number, which we shall deal with
in Lecture VII., but the whole theory of physical concepts which will be
outlined in our next two lectures, is inspired by mathematical logic,
and could never have been imagined without it.

In both these cases, and in many others, we shall appeal to a certain
principle called "the principle of abstraction." This principle, which
might equally well be called "the principle which dispenses with
abstraction," and is one which clears away incredible accumulations of
metaphysical lumber, was directly suggested by mathematical logic, and
could hardly have been proved or practically used without its help. The
principle will be explained in our fourth lecture, but its use may be
briefly indicated in advance. When a group of objects have that kind of
similarity which we are inclined to attribute to possession of a common
quality, the principle in question shows that membership of the group
will serve all the purposes of the supposed common quality, and that
therefore, unless some common quality is actually known, the group or
class of similar objects may be used to replace the common quality,
which need not be assumed to exist. In this and other ways, the indirect
uses of even the later parts of mathematical logic are very great; but
it is now time to turn our attention to its philosophical foundations.

In every proposition and in every inference there is, besides the
particular subject-matter concerned, a certain _form_, a way in which
the constituents of the proposition or inference are put together. If I
say, "Socrates is mortal," "Jones is angry," "The sun is hot," there is
something in common in these three cases, something indicated by the
word "is." What is in common is the _form_ of the proposition, not an
actual constituent. If I say a number of things about Socrates--that he
was an Athenian, that he married Xantippe, that he drank the
hemlock--there is a common constituent, namely Socrates, in all the
propositions I enunciate, but they have diverse forms. If, on the other
hand, I take any one of these propositions and replace its constituents,
one at a time, by other constituents, the form remains constant, but no
constituent remains. Take (say) the series of propositions, "Socrates
drank the hemlock," "Coleridge drank the hemlock," "Coleridge drank
opium," "Coleridge ate opium." The form remains unchanged throughout
this series, but all the constituents are altered. Thus form is not
another constituent, but is the way the constituents are put together.
It is forms, in this sense, that are the proper object of philosophical
logic.

It is obvious that the knowledge of logical forms is something quite
different from knowledge of existing things. The form of "Socrates drank
the hemlock" is not an existing thing like Socrates or the hemlock, nor
does it even have that close relation to existing things that drinking
has. It is something altogether more abstract and remote. We might
understand all the separate words of a sentence without understanding
the sentence: if a sentence is long and complicated, this is apt to
happen. In such a case we have knowledge of the constituents, but not of
the form. We may also have knowledge of the form without having
knowledge of the constituents. If I say, "Rorarius drank the hemlock,"
those among you who have never heard of Rorarius (supposing there are
any) will understand the form, without having knowledge of all the
constituents. In order to understand a sentence, it is necessary to have
knowledge both of the constituents and of the particular instance of the
form. It is in this way that a sentence conveys information, since it
tells us that certain known objects are related according to a certain
known form. Thus some kind of knowledge of logical forms, though with
most people it is not explicit, is involved in all understanding of
discourse. It is the business of philosophical logic to extract this
knowledge from its concrete integuments, and to render it explicit and
pure.

In all inference, form alone is essential: the particular subject-matter
is irrelevant except as securing the truth of the premisses. This is one
reason for the great importance of logical form. When I say, "Socrates
was a man, all men are mortal, therefore Socrates was mortal," the
connection of premisses and conclusion does not in any way depend upon
its being Socrates and man and mortality that I am mentioning. The
general form of the inference may be expressed in some such words as,
"If a thing has a certain property, and whatever has this property has a
certain other property, then the thing in question also has that other
property." Here no particular things or properties are mentioned: the
proposition is absolutely general. All inferences, when stated fully,
are instances of propositions having this kind of generality. If they
seem to depend upon the subject-matter otherwise than as regards the
truth of the premisses, that is because the premisses have not been all
explicitly stated. In logic, it is a waste of time to deal with
inferences concerning particular cases: we deal throughout with
completely general and purely formal implications, leaving it to other
sciences to discover when the hypotheses are verified and when they are
not.

But the forms of propositions giving rise to inferences are not the
simplest forms: they are always hypothetical, stating that if one
proposition is true, then so is another. Before considering inference,
therefore, logic must consider those simpler forms which inference
presupposes. Here the traditional logic failed completely: it believed
that there was only one form of simple proposition (_i.e._ of
proposition not stating a relation between two or more other
propositions), namely, the form which ascribes a predicate to a subject.
This is the appropriate form in assigning the qualities of a given
thing--we may say "this thing is round, and red, and so on." Grammar
favours this form, but philosophically it is so far from universal that
it is not even very common. If we say "this thing is bigger than that,"
we are not assigning a mere quality of "this," but a relation of "this"
and "that." We might express the same fact by saying "that thing is
smaller than this," where grammatically the subject is changed. Thus
propositions stating that two things have a certain relation have a
different form from subject-predicate propositions, and the failure to
perceive this difference or to allow for it has been the source of many
errors in traditional metaphysics.

The belief or unconscious conviction that all propositions are of the
subject-predicate form--in other words, that every fact consists in some
thing having some quality--has rendered most philosophers incapable of
giving any account of the world of science and daily life. If they had
been honestly anxious to give such an account, they would probably have
discovered their error very quickly; but most of them were less anxious
to understand the world of science and daily life, than to convict it of
unreality in the interests of a super-sensible "real" world. Belief in
the unreality of the world of sense arises with irresistible force in
certain moods--moods which, I imagine, have some simple physiological
basis, but are none the less powerfully persuasive. The conviction born
of these moods is the source of most mysticism and of most metaphysics.
When the emotional intensity of such a mood subsides, a man who is in
the habit of reasoning will search for logical reasons in favour of the
belief which he finds in himself. But since the belief already exists,
he will be very hospitable to any reason that suggests itself. The
paradoxes apparently proved by his logic are really the paradoxes of
mysticism, and are the goal which he feels his logic must reach if it is
to be in accordance with insight. It is in this way that logic has been
pursued by those of the great philosophers who were mystics--notably
Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel. But since they usually took for granted the
supposed insight of the mystic emotion, their logical doctrines were
presented with a certain dryness, and were believed by their disciples
to be quite independent of the sudden illumination from which they
sprang. Nevertheless their origin clung to them, and they remained--to
borrow a useful word from Mr Santayana--"malicious" in regard to the
world of science and common sense. It is only so that we can account for
the complacency with which philosophers have accepted the inconsistency
of their doctrines with all the common and scientific facts which seem
best established and most worthy of belief.

The logic of mysticism shows, as is natural, the defects which are
inherent in anything malicious. While the mystic mood is dominant, the
need of logic is not felt; as the mood fades, the impulse to logic
reasserts itself, but with a desire to retain the vanishing insight, or
at least to prove that it _was_ insight, and that what seems to
contradict it is illusion. The logic which thus arises is not quite
disinterested or candid, and is inspired by a certain hatred of the
daily world to which it is to be applied. Such an attitude naturally
does not tend to the best results. Everyone knows that to read an author
simply in order to refute him is not the way to understand him; and to
read the book of Nature with a conviction that it is all illusion is
just as unlikely to lead to understanding. If our logic is to find the
common world intelligible, it must not be hostile, but must be inspired
by a genuine acceptance such as is not usually to be found among
metaphysicians.

Traditional logic, since it holds that all propositions have the
subject-predicate form, is unable to admit the reality of relations: all
relations, it maintains, must be reduced to properties of the apparently
related terms. There are many ways of refuting this opinion; one of the
easiest is derived from the consideration of what are called
"asymmetrical" relations. In order to explain this, I will first explain
two independent ways of classifying relations.

Some relations, when they hold between A and B, also hold between B and
A. Such, for example, is the relation "brother or sister." If A is a
brother or sister of B, then B is a brother or sister of A. Such again
is any kind of similarity, say similarity of colour. Any kind of
dissimilarity is also of this kind: if the colour of A is unlike the
colour of B, then the colour of B is unlike the colour of A. Relations
of this sort are called _symmetrical_. Thus a relation is symmetrical
if, whenever it holds between A and B, it also holds between B and A.

All relations that are not symmetrical are called _non-symmetrical_.
Thus "brother" is non-symmetrical, because, if A is a brother of B, it
may happen that B is a _sister_ of A.

A relation is called _asymmetrical_ when, if it holds between A and B,
it _never_ holds between B and A. Thus husband, father, grandfather,
etc., are asymmetrical relations. So are _before_, _after_, _greater_,
_above_, _to the right of_, etc. All the relations that give rise to
series are of this kind.

Classification into symmetrical, asymmetrical, and merely
non-symmetrical relations is the first of the two classifications we had
to consider. The second is into transitive, intransitive, and merely
non-transitive relations, which are defined as follows.

A relation is said to be _transitive_, if, whenever it holds between A
and B and also between B and C, it holds between A and C. Thus _before_,
_after_, _greater_, _above_ are transitive. All relations giving rise to
series are transitive, but so are many others. The transitive relations
just mentioned were asymmetrical, but many transitive relations are
symmetrical--for instance, equality in any respect, exact identity of
colour, being equally numerous (as applied to collections), and so on.

A relation is said to be _non-transitive_ whenever it is not transitive.
Thus "brother" is non-transitive, because a brother of one's brother may
be oneself. All kinds of dissimilarity are non-transitive.

A relation is said to be _intransitive_ when, if A has the relation to
B, and B to C, A never has it to C. Thus "father" is intransitive. So is
such a relation as "one inch taller" or "one year later."

Let us now, in the light of this classification, return to the question
whether all relations can be reduced to predications.

In the case of symmetrical relations--_i.e._ relations which, if they
hold between A and B, also hold between B and A--some kind of
plausibility can be given to this doctrine. A symmetrical relation which
is transitive, such as equality, can be regarded as expressing
possession of some common property, while one which is not transitive,
such as inequality, can be regarded as expressing possession of
different properties. But when we come to asymmetrical relations, such
as before and after, greater and less, etc., the attempt to reduce them
to properties becomes obviously impossible. When, for example, two
things are merely known to be unequal, without our knowing which is
greater, we may say that the inequality results from their having
different magnitudes, because inequality is a symmetrical relation; but
to say that when one thing is _greater_ than another, and not merely
unequal to it, that means that they have different magnitudes, is
formally incapable of explaining the facts. For if the other thing had
been greater than the one, the magnitudes would also have been
different, though the fact to be explained would not have been the same.
Thus mere _difference_ of magnitude is not _all_ that is involved,
since, if it were, there would be no difference between one thing being
greater than another, and the other being greater than the one. We shall
have to say that the one magnitude is _greater_ than the other, and thus
we shall have failed to get rid of the relation "greater." In short,
both possession of the same property and possession of different
properties are _symmetrical_ relations, and therefore cannot account for
the existence of _asymmetrical_ relations.

Asymmetrical relations are involved in all series--in space and time,
greater and less, whole and part, and many others of the most important
characteristics of the actual world. All these aspects, therefore, the
logic which reduces everything to subjects and predicates is compelled
to condemn as error and mere appearance. To those whose logic is not
malicious, such a wholesale condemnation appears impossible. And in fact
there is no reason except prejudice, so far as I can discover, for
denying the reality of relations. When once their reality is admitted,
all _logical_ grounds for supposing the world of sense to be illusory
disappear. If this is to be supposed, it must be frankly and simply on
the ground of mystic insight unsupported by argument. It is impossible
to argue against what professes to be insight, so long as it does not
argue in its own favour. As logicians, therefore, we may admit the
possibility of the mystic's world, while yet, so long as we do not have
his insight, we must continue to study the everyday world with which we
are familiar. But when he contends that our world is impossible, then
our logic is ready to repel his attack. And the first step in creating
the logic which is to perform this service is the recognition of the
reality of relations.

Relations which have two terms are only one kind of relations. A
relation may have three terms, or four, or any number. Relations of two
terms, being the simplest, have received more attention than the others,
and have generally been alone considered by philosophers, both those who
accepted and those who denied the reality of relations. But other
relations have their importance, and are indispensable in the solution
of certain problems. Jealousy, for example, is a relation between three
people. Professor Royce mentions the relation "giving": when A gives B
to C, that is a relation of three terms.[15] When a man says to his
wife: "My dear, I wish you could induce Angelina to accept Edwin," his
wish constitutes a relation between four people, himself, his wife,
Angelina, and Edwin. Thus such relations are by no means recondite or
rare. But in order to explain exactly how they differ from relations of
two terms, we must embark upon a classification of the logical forms of
facts, which is the first business of logic, and the business in which
the traditional logic has been most deficient.

  [15] _Encyclopdia of the Philosophical Sciences_, vol. i. p. 97.

The existing world consists of many things with many qualities and
relations. A complete description of the existing world would require
not only a catalogue of the things, but also a mention of all their
qualities and relations. We should have to know not only this, that, and
the other thing, but also which was red, which yellow, which was earlier
than which, which was between which two others, and so on. When I speak
of a "fact," I do not mean one of the simple things in the world; I mean
that a certain thing has a certain quality, or that certain things have
a certain relation. Thus, for example, I should not call Napoleon a
fact, but I should call it a fact that he was ambitious, or that he
married Josephine. Now a fact, in this sense, is never simple, but
always has two or more constituents. When it simply assigns a quality to
a thing, it has only two constituents, the thing and the quality. When
it consists of a relation between two things, it has three constituents,
the things and the relation. When it consists of a relation between
three things, it has four constituents, and so on. The constituents of
facts, in the sense in which we are using the word "fact," are not other
facts, but are things and qualities or relations. When we say that there
are relations of more than two terms, we mean that there are single
facts consisting of a single relation and more than two things. I do not
mean that one relation of two terms may hold between A and B, and also
between A and C, as, for example, a man is the son of his father and
also the son of his mother. This constitutes two distinct facts: if we
choose to treat it as one fact, it is a fact which has facts for its
constituents. But the facts I am speaking of have no facts among their
constituents, but only things and relations. For example, when A is
jealous of B on account of C, there is only one fact, involving three
people; there are not two instances of jealousy, but only one. It is in
such cases that I speak of a relation of three terms, where the simplest
possible fact in which the relation occurs is one involving three things
in addition to the relation. And the same applies to relations of four
terms or five or any other number. All such relations must be admitted
in our inventory of the logical forms of facts: two facts involving the
same number of things have the same form, and two which involve
different numbers of things have different forms.

Given any fact, there is an assertion which expresses the fact. The fact
itself is objective, and independent of our thought or opinion about it;
but the assertion is something which involves thought, and may be either
true or false. An assertion may be positive or negative: we may assert
that Charles I. was executed, or that he did _not_ die in his bed. A
negative assertion may be said to be a _denial_. Given a form of words
which must be either true or false, such as "Charles I. died in his
bed," we may either assert or deny this form of words: in the one case
we have a positive assertion, in the other a negative one. A form of
words which must be either true or false I shall call a _proposition_.
Thus a proposition is the same as what may be significantly asserted or
denied. A proposition which expresses what we have called a fact, _i.e._
which, when asserted, asserts that a certain thing has a certain
quality, or that certain things have a certain relation, will be called
an atomic proposition, because, as we shall see immediately, there are
other propositions into which atomic propositions enter in a way
analogous to that in which atoms enter into molecules. Atomic
propositions, although, like facts, they may have any one of an infinite
number of forms, are only one kind of propositions. All other kinds are
more complicated. In order to preserve the parallelism in language as
regards facts and propositions, we shall give the name "atomic facts" to
the facts we have hitherto been considering. Thus atomic facts are what
determine whether atomic propositions are to be asserted or denied.

Whether an atomic proposition, such as "this is red," or "this is before
that," is to be asserted or denied can only be known empirically.
Perhaps one atomic fact may sometimes be capable of being inferred from
another, though this seems very doubtful; but in any case it cannot be
inferred from premisses no one of which is an atomic fact. It follows
that, if atomic facts are to be known at all, some at least must be
known without inference. The atomic facts which we come to know in this
way are the facts of sense-perception; at any rate, the facts of
sense-perception are those which we most obviously and certainly come to
know in this way. If we knew all atomic facts, and also knew that there
were none except those we knew, we should, theoretically, be able to
infer all truths of whatever form.[16] Thus logic would then supply us
with the whole of the apparatus required. But in the first acquisition
of knowledge concerning atomic facts, logic is useless. In pure logic,
no atomic fact is ever mentioned: we confine ourselves wholly to forms,
without asking ourselves what objects can fill the forms. Thus pure
logic is independent of atomic facts; but conversely, they are, in a
sense, independent of logic. Pure logic and atomic facts are the two
poles, the wholly _a priori_ and the wholly empirical. But between the
two lies a vast intermediate region, which we must now briefly explore.

  [16] This perhaps requires modification in order to include such facts
  as beliefs and wishes, since such facts apparently contain
  propositions as components. Such facts, though not strictly atomic,
  must be supposed included if the statement in the text is to be true.

"Molecular" propositions are such as contain conjunctions--_if_, _or_,
_and_, _unless_, etc.--and such words are the marks of a molecular
proposition. Consider such an assertion as, "If it rains, I shall bring
my umbrella." This assertion is just as capable of truth or falsehood as
the assertion of an atomic proposition, but it is obvious that either
the corresponding fact, or the nature of the correspondence with fact,
must be quite different from what it is in the case of an atomic
proposition. Whether it rains, and whether I bring my umbrella, are each
severally matters of atomic fact, ascertainable by observation. But the
connection of the two involved in saying that _if_ the one happens,
_then_ the other will happen, is something radically different from
either of the two separately. It does not require for its truth that it
should actually rain, or that I should actually bring my umbrella; even
if the weather is cloudless, it may still be true that I should have
brought my umbrella if the weather had been different. Thus we have here
a connection of two propositions, which does not depend upon whether
they are to be asserted or denied, but only upon the second being
inferable from the first. Such propositions, therefore, have a form
which is different from that of any atomic proposition.

Such propositions are important to logic, because all inference depends
upon them. If I have told you that if it rains I shall bring my
umbrella, and if you see that there is a steady downpour, you can infer
that I shall bring my umbrella. There can be no inference except where
propositions are connected in some such way, so that from the truth or
falsehood of the one something follows as to the truth or falsehood of
the other. It seems to be the case that we can sometimes know molecular
propositions, as in the above instance of the umbrella, when we do not
know whether the component atomic propositions are true or false. The
_practical_ utility of inference rests upon this fact.

The next kind of propositions we have to consider are _general_
propositions, such as "all men are mortal," "all equilateral triangles
are equiangular." And with these belong propositions in which the word
"some" occurs, such as "some men are philosophers" or "some philosophers
are not wise." These are the denials of general propositions, namely (in
the above instances), of "all men are non-philosophers" and "all
philosophers are wise." We will call propositions containing the word
"some" _negative_ general propositions, and those containing the word
"all" _positive_ general propositions. These propositions, it will be
seen, begin to have the appearance of the propositions in logical
text-books. But their peculiarity and complexity are not known to the
text-books, and the problems which they raise are only discussed in the
most superficial manner.

When we were discussing atomic facts, we saw that we should be able,
theoretically, to infer all other truths by logic if we knew all atomic
facts and also knew that there were no other atomic facts besides those
we knew. The knowledge that there are no other atomic facts is positive
general knowledge; it is the knowledge that "all atomic facts are known
to me," or at least "all atomic facts are in this collection"--however
the collection may be given. It is easy to see that general
propositions, such as "all men are mortal," cannot be known by inference
from atomic facts alone. If we could know each individual man, and know
that he was mortal, that would not enable us to know that all men are
mortal, unless we _knew_ that those were all the men there are, which is
a general proposition. If we knew every other existing thing throughout
the universe, and knew that each separate thing was not an immortal man,
that would not give us our result unless we _knew_ that we had explored
the whole universe, _i.e._ unless we knew "all things belong to this
collection of things I have examined." Thus general truths cannot be
inferred from particular truths alone, but must, if they are to be
known, be either self-evident, or inferred from premisses of which at
least one is a general truth. But all _empirical_ evidence is of
_particular_ truths. Hence, if there is any knowledge of general truths
at all, there must be _some_ knowledge of general truths which is
independent of empirical evidence, _i.e._ does not depend upon the data
of sense.

The above conclusion, of which we had an instance in the case of the
inductive principle, is important, since it affords a refutation of the
older empiricists. They believed that all our knowledge is derived from
the senses and dependent upon them. We see that, if this view is to be
maintained, we must refuse to admit that we know any general
propositions. It is perfectly possible logically that this should be the
case, but it does not appear to be so in fact, and indeed no one would
dream of maintaining such a view except a theorist at the last
extremity. We must therefore admit that there is general knowledge not
derived from sense, and that some of this knowledge is not obtained by
inference but is primitive.

Such general knowledge is to be found in logic. Whether there is any
such knowledge not derived from logic, I do not know; but in logic, at
any rate, we have such knowledge. It will be remembered that we excluded
from pure logic such propositions as, "Socrates is a man, all men are
mortal, therefore Socrates is mortal," because Socrates and _man_ and
_mortal_ are empirical terms, only to be understood through particular
experience. The corresponding proposition in pure logic is: "If anything
has a certain property, and whatever has this property has a certain
other property, then the thing in question has the other property." This
proposition is absolutely general: it applies to all things and all
properties. And it is quite self-evident. Thus in such propositions of
pure logic we have the self-evident general propositions of which we
were in search.

A proposition such as, "If Socrates is a man, and all men are mortal,
then Socrates is mortal," is true in virtue of its _form_ alone. Its
truth, in this hypothetical form, does not depend upon whether Socrates
actually is a man, nor upon whether in fact all men are mortal; thus it
is equally true when we substitute other terms for Socrates and _man_
and _mortal_. The general truth of which it is an instance is purely
formal, and belongs to logic. Since it does not mention any particular
thing, or even any particular quality or relation, it is wholly
independent of the accidental facts of the existent world, and can be
known, theoretically, without any experience of particular things or
their qualities and relations.

Logic, we may say, consists of two parts. The first part investigates
what propositions are and what forms they may have; this part enumerates
the different kinds of atomic propositions, of molecular propositions,
of general propositions, and so on. The second part consists of certain
supremely general propositions, which assert the truth of all
propositions of certain forms. This second part merges into pure
mathematics, whose propositions all turn out, on analysis, to be such
general formal truths. The first part, which merely enumerates forms, is
the more difficult, and philosophically the more important; and it is
the recent progress in this first part, more than anything else, that
has rendered a truly scientific discussion of many philosophical
problems possible.

The problem of the nature of judgment or belief may be taken as an
example of a problem whose solution depends upon an adequate inventory
of logical forms. We have already seen how the supposed universality of
the subject-predicate form made it impossible to give a right analysis
of serial order, and therefore made space and time unintelligible. But
in this case it was only necessary to admit relations of two terms. The
case of judgment demands the admission of more complicated forms. If all
judgments were true, we might suppose that a judgment consisted in
apprehension of a _fact_, and that the apprehension was a relation of a
mind to the fact. From poverty in the logical inventory, this view has
often been held. But it leads to absolutely insoluble difficulties in
the case of error. Suppose I believe that Charles I. died in his bed.
There is no objective fact "Charles I.'s death in his bed" to which I
can have a relation of apprehension. Charles I. and death and his bed
are objective, but they are not, except in my thought, put together as
my false belief supposes. It is therefore necessary, in analysing a
belief, to look for some other logical form than a two-term relation.
Failure to realise this necessity has, in my opinion, vitiated almost
everything that has hitherto been written on the theory of knowledge,
making the problem of error insoluble and the difference between belief
and perception inexplicable.

Modern logic, as I hope is now evident, has the effect of enlarging our
abstract imagination, and providing an infinite number of possible
hypotheses to be applied in the analysis of any complex fact. In this
respect it is the exact opposite of the logic practised by the classical
tradition. In that logic, hypotheses which seem _prim facie_ possible
are professedly proved impossible, and it is decreed in advance that
reality must have a certain special character. In modern logic, on the
contrary, while the _prim facie_ hypotheses as a rule remain
admissible, others, which only logic would have suggested, are added to
our stock, and are very often found to be indispensable if a right
analysis of the facts is to be obtained. The old logic put thought in
fetters, while the new logic gives it wings. It has, in my opinion,
introduced the same kind of advance into philosophy as Galileo
introduced into physics, making it possible at last to see what kinds of
problems may be capable of solution, and what kinds must be abandoned as
beyond human powers. And where a solution appears possible, the new
logic provides a method which enables us to obtain results that do not
merely embody personal idiosyncrasies, but must command the assent of
all who are competent to form an opinion.




LECTURE III

ON OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD


Philosophy may be approached by many roads, but one of the oldest and
most travelled is the road which leads through doubt as to the reality
of the world of sense. In Indian mysticism, in Greek and modern monistic
philosophy from Parmenides onward, in Berkeley, in modern physics, we
find sensible appearance criticised and condemned for a bewildering
variety of motives. The mystic condemns it on the ground of immediate
knowledge of a more real and significant world behind the veil;
Parmenides and Plato condemn it because its continual flux is thought
inconsistent with the unchanging nature of the abstract entities
revealed by logical analysis; Berkeley brings several weapons, but his
chief is the subjectivity of sense-data, their dependence upon the
organisation and point of view of the spectator; while modern physics,
on the basis of sensible evidence itself, maintains a mad dance of
electrons which has, superficially at least, very little resemblance to
the immediate objects of sight or touch.

Every one of these lines of attack raises vital and interesting
problems.

The mystic, so long as he merely reports a positive revelation, cannot
be refuted; but when he _denies_ reality to objects of sense, he may be
questioned as to what he means by "reality," and may be asked how their
unreality follows from the supposed reality of his super-sensible world.
In answering these questions, he is led to a logic which merges into
that of Parmenides and Plato and the idealist tradition.

The logic of the idealist tradition has gradually grown very complex and
very abstruse, as may be seen from the Bradleian sample considered in
our first lecture. If we attempted to deal fully with this logic, we
should not have time to reach any other aspect of our subject; we will
therefore, while acknowledging that it deserves a long discussion, pass
by its central doctrines with only such occasional criticism as may
serve to exemplify other topics, and concentrate our attention on such
matters as its objections to the continuity of motion and the infinity
of space and time--objections which have been fully answered by modern
mathematicians in a manner constituting an abiding triumph for the
method of logical analysis in philosophy. These objections and the
modern answers to them will occupy our fifth, sixth, and seventh
lectures.

Berkeley's attack, as reinforced by the physiology of the sense-organs
and nerves and brain, is very powerful. I think it must be admitted as
probable that the immediate objects of sense depend for their existence
upon physiological conditions in ourselves, and that, for example, the
coloured surfaces which we see cease to exist when we shut our eyes. But
it would be a mistake to infer that they are dependent upon mind, not
real while we see them, or not the sole basis for our knowledge of the
external world. This line of argument will be developed in the present
lecture.

The discrepancy between the world of physics and the world of sense,
which we shall consider in our fourth lecture, will be found to be more
apparent than real, and it will be shown that whatever there is reason
to believe in physics can probably be interpreted in terms of sense.

The instrument of discovery throughout is modern logic, a very different
science from the logic of the text-books and also from the logic of
idealism. Our second lecture has given a short account of modern logic
and of its points of divergence from the various traditional kinds of
logic.

In our last lecture, after a discussion of causality and free will, we
shall try to reach a general account of the logical-analytic method of
scientific philosophy, and a tentative estimate of the hopes of
philosophical progress which it allows us to entertain.

In this lecture, I wish to apply the logical-analytic method to one of
the oldest problems of philosophy, namely, the problem of our knowledge
of the external world. What I have to say on this problem does not
amount to an answer of a definite and dogmatic kind; it amounts only to
an analysis and statement of the questions involved, with an indication
of the directions in which evidence may be sought. But although not yet
a definite solution, what can be said at present seems to me to throw a
completely new light on the problem, and to be indispensable, not only
in seeking the answer, but also in the preliminary question as to what
parts of our problem may possibly have an ascertainable answer.

In every philosophical problem, our investigation starts from what may
be called "data," by which I mean matters of common knowledge, vague,
complex, inexact, as common knowledge always is, but yet somehow
commanding our assent as on the whole and in some interpretation pretty
certainly true. In the case of our present problem, the common knowledge
involved is of various kinds. There is first our acquaintance with
particular objects of daily life--furniture, houses, towns, other
people, and so on. Then there is the extension of such particular
knowledge to particular things outside our personal experience, through
history and geography, newspapers, etc. And lastly, there is the
systematisation of all this knowledge of particulars by means of
physical science, which derives immense persuasive force from its
astonishing power of foretelling the future. We are quite willing to
admit that there may be errors of detail in this knowledge, but we
believe them to be discoverable and corrigible by the methods which have
given rise to our beliefs, and we do not, as practical men, entertain
for a moment the hypothesis that the whole edifice may be built on
insecure foundations. In the main, therefore, and without absolute
dogmatism as to this or that special portion, we may accept this mass of
common knowledge as affording data for our philosophical analysis.

It may be said--and this is an objection which must be met at the
outset--that it is the duty of the philosopher to call in question the
admittedly fallible beliefs of daily life, and to replace them by
something more solid and irrefragable. In a sense this is true, and in a
sense it is effected in the course of analysis. But in another sense,
and a very important one, it is quite impossible. While admitting that
doubt is possible with regard to all our common knowledge, we must
nevertheless accept that knowledge in the main if philosophy is to be
possible at all. There is not any superfine brand of knowledge,
obtainable by the philosopher, which can give us a standpoint from which
to criticise the whole of the knowledge of daily life. The most that can
be done is to examine and purify our common knowledge by an internal
scrutiny, assuming the canons by which it has been obtained, and
applying them with more care and with more precision. Philosophy cannot
boast of having achieved such a degree of certainty that it can have
authority to condemn the facts of experience and the laws of science.
The philosophic scrutiny, therefore, though sceptical in regard to every
detail, is not sceptical as regards the whole. That is to say, its
criticism of details will only be based upon their relation to other
details, not upon some external criterion which can be applied to all
the details equally. The reason for this abstention from a universal
criticism is not any dogmatic confidence, but its exact opposite; it is
not that common knowledge _must_ be true, but that we possess no
radically different kind of knowledge derived from some other source.
Universal scepticism, though logically irrefutable, is practically
barren; it can only, therefore, give a certain flavour of hesitancy to
our beliefs, and cannot be used to substitute other beliefs for them.

Although data can only be criticised by other data, not by an outside
standard, yet we may distinguish different grades of certainty in the
different kinds of common knowledge which we enumerated just now. What
does not go beyond our own personal sensible acquaintance must be for us
the most certain: the "evidence of the senses" is proverbially the least
open to question. What depends on testimony, like the facts of history
and geography which are learnt from books, has varying degrees of
certainty according to the nature and extent of the testimony. Doubts as
to the existence of Napoleon can only be maintained for a joke, whereas
the historicity of Agamemnon is a legitimate subject of debate. In
science, again, we find all grades of certainty short of the highest.
The law of gravitation, at least as an approximate truth, has acquired
by this time the same kind of certainty as the existence of Napoleon,
whereas the latest speculations concerning the constitution of matter
would be universally acknowledged to have as yet only a rather slight
probability in their favour. These varying degrees of certainty
attaching to different data may be regarded as themselves forming part
of our data; they, along with the other data, lie within the vague,
complex, inexact body of knowledge which it is the business of the
philosopher to analyse.

The first thing that appears when we begin to analyse our common
knowledge is that some of it is derivative, while some is primitive;
that is to say, there is some that we only believe because of something
else from which it has been inferred in some sense, though not
necessarily in a strict logical sense, while other parts are believed on
their own account, without the support of any outside evidence. It is
obvious that the senses give knowledge of the latter kind: the immediate
facts perceived by sight or touch or hearing do not need to be proved by
argument, but are completely self-evident. Psychologists, however, have
made us aware that what is actually given in sense is much less than
most people would naturally suppose, and that much of what at first
sight seems to be given is really inferred. This applies especially in
regard to our space-perceptions. For instance, we instinctively infer
the "real" size and shape of a visible object from its apparent size and
shape, according to its distance and our point of view. When we hear a
person speaking, our actual sensations usually miss a great deal of what
he says, and we supply its place by unconscious inference; in a foreign
language, where this process is more difficult, we find ourselves
apparently grown deaf, requiring, for example, to be much nearer the
stage at a theatre than would be necessary in our own country. Thus the
first step in the analysis of data, namely, the discovery of what is
really given in sense, is full of difficulty. We will, however, not
linger on this point; so long as its existence is realised, the exact
outcome does not make any very great difference in our main problem.

The next step in our analysis must be the consideration of how the
derivative parts of our common knowledge arise. Here we become involved
in a somewhat puzzling entanglement of logic and psychology.
Psychologically, a belief may be called derivative whenever it is caused
by one or more other beliefs, or by some fact of sense which is not
simply what the belief asserts. Derivative beliefs in this sense
constantly arise without any process of logical inference, merely by
association of ideas or some equally extra-logical process. From the
expression of a man's face we judge as to what he is feeling: we say we
_see_ that he is angry, when in fact we only see a frown. We do not
judge as to his state of mind by any logical process: the judgment grows
up, often without our being able to say what physical mark of emotion we
actually saw. In such a case, the knowledge is derivative
psychologically; but logically it is in a sense primitive, since it is
not the result of any logical deduction. There may or may not be a
possible deduction leading to the same result, but whether there is or
not, we certainly do not employ it. If we call a belief "logically
primitive" when it is not actually arrived at by a logical inference,
then innumerable beliefs are logically primitive which psychologically
are derivative. The separation of these two kinds of primitiveness is
vitally important to our present discussion.

When we reflect upon the beliefs which are logically but not
psychologically primitive, we find that, unless they can on reflection
be deduced by a logical process from beliefs which are also
psychologically primitive, our confidence in their truth tends to
diminish the more we think about them. We naturally believe, for
example, that tables and chairs, trees and mountains, are still there
when we turn our backs upon them. I do not wish for a moment to maintain
that this is certainly not the case, but I do maintain that the question
whether it is the case is not to be settled off-hand on any supposed
ground of obviousness. The belief that they persist is, in all men
except a few philosophers, logically primitive, but it is not
psychologically primitive; psychologically, it arises only through our
having seen those tables and chairs, trees and mountains. As soon as the
question is seriously raised whether, because we have seen them, we have
a right to suppose that they are there still, we feel that some kind of
argument must be produced, and that if none is forthcoming, our belief
can be no more than a pious opinion. We do not feel this as regards the
immediate objects of sense: there they are, and as far as their
momentary existence is concerned, no further argument is required. There
is accordingly more need of justifying our psychologically derivative
beliefs than of justifying those that are primitive.

We are thus led to a somewhat vague distinction between what we may call
"hard" data and "soft" data. This distinction is a matter of degree, and
must not be pressed; but if not taken too seriously it may help to make
the situation clear. I mean by "hard" data those which resist the
solvent influence of critical reflection, and by "soft" data those
which, under the operation of this process, become to our minds more or
less doubtful. The hardest of hard data are of two sorts: the particular
facts of sense, and the general truths of logic. The more we reflect
upon these, the more we realise exactly what they are, and exactly what
a doubt concerning them really means, the more luminously certain do
they become. _Verbal_ doubt concerning even these is possible, but
verbal doubt may occur when what is nominally being doubted is not
really in our thoughts, and only words are actually present to our
minds. Real doubt, in these two cases, would, I think, be pathological.
At any rate, to me they seem quite certain, and I shall assume that you
agree with me in this. Without this assumption, we are in danger of
falling into that universal scepticism which, as we saw, is as barren as
it is irrefutable. If we are to continue philosophising, we must make
our bow to the sceptical hypothesis, and, while admitting the elegant
terseness of its philosophy, proceed to the consideration of other
hypotheses which, though perhaps not certain, have at least as good a
right to our respect as the hypothesis of the sceptic.

Applying our distinction of "hard" and "soft" data to psychologically
derivative but logically primitive beliefs, we shall find that most, if
not all, are to be classed as soft data. They may be found, on
reflection, to be capable of logical proof, and they then again become
believed, but no longer as data. As data, though entitled to a certain
limited respect, they cannot be placed on a level with the facts of
sense or the laws of logic. The kind of respect which they deserve seems
to me such as to warrant us in hoping, though not too confidently, that
the hard data may prove them to be at least probable. Also, if the hard
data are found to throw no light whatever upon their truth or falsehood,
we are justified, I think, in giving rather more weight to the
hypothesis of their truth than to the hypothesis of their falsehood. For
the present, however, let us confine ourselves to the hard data, with a
view to discovering what sort of world can be constructed by their means
alone.

Our data now are primarily the facts of sense (_i.e._ of _our own_
sense-data) and the laws of logic. But even the severest scrutiny will
allow some additions to this slender stock. Some facts of
memory--especially of recent memory--seem to have the highest degree of
certainty. Some introspective facts are as certain as any facts of
sense. And facts of sense themselves must, for our present purposes, be
interpreted with a certain latitude. Spatial and temporal relations must
sometimes be included, for example in the case of a swift motion falling
wholly within the specious present. And some facts of comparison, such
as the likeness or unlikeness of two shades of colour, are certainly to
be included among hard data. Also we must remember that the distinction
of hard and soft data is psychological and subjective, so that, if there
are other minds than our own--which at our present stage must be held
doubtful--the catalogue of hard data may be different for them from what
it is for us.

Certain common beliefs are undoubtedly excluded from hard data. Such is
the belief which led us to introduce the distinction, namely, that
sensible objects in general persist when we are not perceiving them.
Such also is the belief in other people's minds: this belief is
obviously derivative from our perception of their bodies, and is felt to
demand logical justification as soon as we become aware of its
derivativeness. Belief in what is reported by the testimony of others,
including all that we learn from books, is of course involved in the
doubt as to whether other people have minds at all. Thus the world from
which our reconstruction is to begin is very fragmentary. The best we
can say for it is that it is slightly more extensive than the world at
which Descartes arrived by a similar process, since that world contained
nothing except himself and his thoughts.

We are now in a position to understand and state the problem of our
knowledge of the external world, and to remove various misunderstandings
which have obscured the meaning of the problem. The problem really is:
Can the existence of anything other than our own hard data be inferred
from the existence of those data? But before considering this problem,
let us briefly consider what the problem is _not_.

When we speak of the "external" world in this discussion, we must not
mean "spatially external," unless "space" is interpreted in a peculiar
and recondite manner. The immediate objects of sight, the coloured
surfaces which make up the visible world, are spatially external in the
natural meaning of this phrase. We feel them to be "there" as opposed to
"here"; without making any assumption of an existence other than hard
data, we can more or less estimate the distance of a coloured surface.
It seems probable that distances, provided they are not too great, are
actually given more or less roughly in sight; but whether this is the
case or not, ordinary distances can certainly be estimated approximately
by means of the data of sense alone. The immediately given world is
spatial, and is further not wholly contained within our own bodies. Thus
our knowledge of what is external in this sense is not open to doubt.

Another form in which the question is often put is: "Can we know of the
existence of any reality which is independent of ourselves?" This form
of the question suffers from the ambiguity of the two words
"independent" and "self." To take the Self first: the question as to
what is to be reckoned part of the Self and what is not, is a very
difficult one. Among many other things which we may mean by the Self,
two may be selected as specially important, namely, (1) the bare subject
which thinks and is aware of objects, (2) the whole assemblage of things
that would necessarily cease to exist if our lives came to an end. The
bare subject, if it exists at all, is an inference, and is not part of
the data; therefore this meaning of Self may be ignored in our present
inquiry. The second meaning is difficult to make precise, since we
hardly know what things depend upon our lives for their existence. And
in this form, the definition of Self introduces the word "depend," which
raises the same questions as are raised by the word "independent." Let
us therefore take up the word "independent," and return to the Self
later.

When we say that one thing is "independent" of another, we may mean
either that it is logically possible for the one to exist without the
other, or that there is no causal relation between the two such that the
one only occurs as the effect of the other. The only way, so far as I
know, in which one thing can be _logically_ dependent upon another is
when the other is _part_ of the one. The existence of a book, for
example, is logically dependent upon that of its pages: without the
pages there would be no book. Thus in this sense the question, "Can we
know of the existence of any reality which is independent of ourselves?"
reduces to the question, "Can we know of the existence of any reality of
which our Self is not part?" In this form, the question brings us back
to the problem of defining the Self; but I think, however the Self may
be defined, even when it is taken as the bare subject, it cannot be
supposed to be part of the immediate object of sense; thus in this form
of the question we must admit that we can know of the existence of
realities independent of ourselves.

The question of causal dependence is much more difficult. To know that
one kind of thing is causally independent of another, we must know that
it actually occurs without the other. Now it is fairly obvious that,
whatever legitimate meaning we give to the Self, our thoughts and
feelings are causally dependent upon ourselves, _i.e._ do not occur when
there is no Self for them to belong to. But in the case of objects of
sense this is not obvious; indeed, as we saw, the common-sense view is
that such objects persist in the absence of any percipient. If this is
the case, then they are causally independent of ourselves; if not, not.
Thus in this form the question reduces to the question whether we can
know that objects of sense, or any other objects not our own thoughts
and feelings, exist at times when we are not perceiving them. This form,
in which the difficult word "independent" no longer occurs, is the form
in which we stated the problem a minute ago.

Our question in the above form raises two distinct problems, which it is
important to keep separate. First, can we know that objects of sense, or
very similar objects, exist at times when we are not perceiving them?
Secondly, if this cannot be known, can we know that other objects,
inferable from objects of sense but not necessarily resembling them,
exist either when we are perceiving the objects of sense or at any other
time? This latter problem arises in philosophy as the problem of the
"thing in itself," and in science as the problem of matter as assumed in
physics. We will consider this latter problem first.

Owing to the fact that we feel passive in sensation, we naturally
suppose that our sensations have outside causes. Now it is necessary
here first of all to distinguish between (1) our sensation, which is a
mental event consisting in our being aware of a sensible object, and (2)
the sensible object of which we are aware in sensation. When I speak of
the sensible object, it must be understood that I do not mean such a
thing as a table, which is both visible and tangible, can be seen by
many people at once, and is more or less permanent. What I mean is just
that patch of colour which is momentarily seen when we look at the
table, or just that particular hardness which is felt when we press it,
or just that particular sound which is heard when we rap it. Each of
these I call a sensible object, and our awareness of it I call a
sensation. Now our sense of passivity, if it really afforded any
argument, would only tend to show that the _sensation_ has an outside
cause; this cause we should naturally seek in the sensible object. Thus
there is no good reason, so far, for supposing that sensible objects
must have outside causes. But both the thing-in-itself of philosophy and
the matter of physics present themselves as outside causes of the
sensible object as much as of the sensation. What are the grounds for
this common opinion?

In each case, I think, the opinion has resulted from the combination of
a belief that _something_ which can persist independently of our
consciousness makes itself known in sensation, with the fact that our
sensations often change in ways which seem to depend upon us rather than
upon anything which would be supposed to persist independently of us. At
first, we believe unreflectingly that everything is as it seems to be,
and that, if we shut our eyes, the objects we had been seeing remain as
they were though we no longer see them. But there are arguments against
this view, which have generally been thought conclusive. It is
extraordinarily difficult to see just what the arguments prove; but if
we are to make any progress with the problem of the external world, we
must try to make up our minds as to these arguments.

A table viewed from one place presents a different appearance from that
which it presents from another place. This is the language of common
sense, but this language already assumes that there is a real table of
which we see the appearances. Let us try to state what is known in terms
of sensible objects alone, without any element of hypothesis. We find
that as we walk round the table, we perceive a series of gradually
changing visible objects. But in speaking of "walking round the table,"
we have still retained the hypothesis that there is a single table
connected with all the appearances. What we ought to say is that, while
we have those muscular and other sensations which make us say we are
walking, our visual sensations change in a continuous way, so that, for
example, a striking patch of colour is not suddenly replaced by
something wholly different, but is replaced by an insensible gradation
of slightly different colours with slightly different shapes. This is
what we really know by experience, when we have freed our minds from the
assumption of permanent "things" with changing appearances. What is
really known is a correlation of muscular and other bodily sensations
with changes in visual sensations.

But walking round the table is not the only way of altering its
appearance. We can shut one eye, or put on blue spectacles, or look
through a microscope. All these operations, in various ways, alter the
visual appearance which we call that of the table. More distant objects
will also alter their appearance if (as we say) the state of the
atmosphere changes--if there is fog or rain or sunshine. Physiological
changes also alter the appearances of things. If we assume the world of
common sense, all these changes, including those attributed to
physiological causes, are changes in the intervening medium. It is not
quite so easy as in the former case to reduce this set of facts to a
form in which nothing is assumed beyond sensible objects. Anything
intervening between ourselves and what we see must be invisible: our
view in every direction is bounded by the nearest visible object. It
might be objected that a dirty pane of glass, for example, is visible
although we can see things through it. But in this case we really see a
spotted patchwork: the dirtier specks in the glass are visible, while
the cleaner parts are invisible and allow us to see what is beyond. Thus
the discovery that the intervening medium affects the appearances of
things cannot be made by means of the sense of sight alone.

Let us take the case of the blue spectacles, which is the simplest, but
may serve as a type for the others. The frame of the spectacles is of
course visible, but the blue glass, if it is clean, is not visible. The
blueness, which we say is in the glass, appears as being in the objects
seen through the glass. The glass itself is known by means of the sense
of touch. In order to know that it is between us and the objects seen
through it, we must know how to correlate the space of touch with the
space of sight. This correlation itself, when stated in terms of the
data of sense alone, is by no means a simple matter. But it presents no
difficulties of principle, and may therefore be supposed accomplished.
When it has been accomplished, it becomes possible to attach a meaning
to the statement that the blue glass, which we can touch, is between us
and the object seen, as we say, "through" it.

But we have still not reduced our statement completely to what is
actually given in sense. We have fallen into the assumption that the
object of which we are conscious when we touch the blue spectacles still
exists after we have ceased to touch them. So long as we are touching
them, nothing except our finger can be seen through the part touched,
which is the only part where we immediately know that there is
something. If we are to account for the blue appearance of objects other
than the spectacles, when seen through them, it might seem as if we must
assume that the spectacles still exist when we are not touching them;
and if this assumption really is necessary, our main problem is
answered: we have means of knowing of the present existence of objects
not given in sense, though of the same kind as objects formerly given in
sense.

It may be questioned, however, whether this assumption is actually
unavoidable, though it is unquestionably the most natural one to make.
We may say that the object of which we become aware when we touch the
spectacles continues to have effects afterwards, though perhaps it no
longer exists. In this view, the supposed continued existence of
sensible objects after they have ceased to be sensible will be a
fallacious inference from the fact that they still have effects. It is
often supposed that nothing which has ceased to exist can continue to
have effects, but this is a mere prejudice, due to a wrong conception of
causality. We cannot, therefore, dismiss our present hypothesis on the
ground of _a priori_ impossibility, but must examine further whether it
can really account for the facts.

It may be said that our hypothesis is useless in the case when the blue
glass is never touched at all. How, in that case, are we to account for
the blue appearance of objects? And more generally, what are we to make
of the hypothetical sensations of touch which we associate with
untouched visible objects, which we know would be verified if we chose,
though in fact we do not verify them? Must not these be attributed to
permanent possession, by the objects, of the properties which touch
would reveal?

Let us consider the more general question first. Experience has taught
us that where we see certain kinds of coloured surfaces we can, by
touch, obtain certain expected sensations of hardness or softness,
tactile shape, and so on. This leads us to believe that what is seen is
usually tangible, and that it has, whether we touch it or not, the
hardness or softness which we should expect to feel if we touched it.
But the mere fact that we are able to infer what our tactile sensations
would be shows that it is not logically necessary to assume tactile
qualities before they are felt. All that is really known is that the
visual appearance in question, together with touch, will lead to certain
sensations, which can necessarily be determined in terms of the visual
appearance, since otherwise they could not be inferred from it.

We can now give a statement of the experienced facts concerning the blue
spectacles, which will supply an interpretation of common-sense beliefs
without assuming anything beyond the existence of sensible objects at
the times when they are sensible. By experience of the correlation of
touch and sight sensations, we become able to associate a certain place
in touch-space with a certain corresponding place in sight-space.
Sometimes, namely in the case of transparent things, we find that there
is a tangible object in a touch-place without there being any visible
object in the corresponding sight-place. But in such a case as that of
the blue spectacles, we find that whatever object is visible beyond the
empty sight-place in the same line of sight has a different colour from
what it has when there is no tangible object in the intervening
touch-place; and as we move the tangible object in touch-space, the blue
patch moves in sight-space. If now we find a blue patch moving in this
way in sight-space, when we have no sensible experience of an
intervening tangible object, we nevertheless infer that, if we put our
hand at a certain place in touch-space, we should experience a certain
touch-sensation. If we are to avoid non-sensible objects, this must be
taken as the whole of our meaning when we say that the blue spectacles
are in a certain place, though we have not touched them, and have only
seen other things rendered blue by their interposition.

I think it may be laid down quite generally that, _in so far_ as physics
or common sense is verifiable, it must be capable of interpretation in
terms of actual sense-data alone. The reason for this is simple.
Verification consists always in the occurrence of an expected
sense-datum. Astronomers tell us there will be an eclipse of the moon:
we look at the moon, and find the earth's shadow biting into it, that is
to say, we see an appearance quite different from that of the usual full
moon. Now if an expected sense-datum constitutes a verification, what
was asserted must have been about sense-data; or, at any rate, if part
of what was asserted was not about sense-data, then only the other part
has been verified. There is in fact a certain regularity or conformity
to law about the occurrence of sense-data, but the sense-data that occur
at one time are often causally connected with those that occur at quite
other times, and not, or at least not very closely, with those that
occur at neighbouring times. If I look at the moon and immediately
afterwards hear a train coming, there is no very close causal connection
between my two sense-data; but if I look at the moon on two nights a
week apart, there is a very close causal connection between the two
sense-data. The simplest, or at least the easiest, statement of the
connection is obtained by imagining a "real" moon which goes on whether
I look at it or not, providing a series of _possible_ sense-data of
which only those are actual which belong to moments when I choose to
look at the moon.

But the degree of verification obtainable in this way is very small. It
must be remembered that, at our present level of doubt, we are not at
liberty to accept testimony. When we hear certain noises, which are
those we should utter if we wished to express a certain thought, we
assume that that thought, or one very like it, has been in another mind,
and has given rise to the expression which we hear. If at the same time
we see a body resembling our own, moving its lips as we move ours when
we speak, we cannot resist the belief that it is alive, and that the
feelings inside it continue when we are not looking at it. When we see
our friend drop a weight upon his toe, and hear him say--what we should
say in similar circumstances, the phenomena _can_ no doubt be explained
without assuming that he is anything but a series of shapes and noises
seen and heard by us, but practically no man is so infected with
philosophy as not to be quite certain that his friend has felt the same
kind of pain as he himself would feel. We will consider the legitimacy
of this belief presently; for the moment, I only wish to point out that
it needs the same kind of justification as our belief that the moon
exists when we do not see it, and that, without it, testimony heard or
read is reduced to noises and shapes, and cannot be regarded as evidence
of the facts which it reports. The verification of physics which is
possible at our present level is, therefore, only that degree of
verification which is possible by one man's unaided observations, which
will not carry us very far towards the establishment of a whole science.

Before proceeding further, let us summarise the argument so far as it
has gone. The problem is: "Can the existence of anything other than our
own hard data be inferred from these data?" It is a mistake to state the
problem in the form: "Can we know of the existence of anything other
than ourselves and our states?" or: "Can we know of the existence of
anything independent of ourselves?" because of the extreme difficulty of
defining "self" and "independent" precisely. The felt passivity of
sensation is irrelevant, since, even if it proved anything, it could
only prove that sensations are caused by sensible objects. The natural
_nave_ belief is that things seen persist, when unseen, exactly or
approximately as they appeared when seen; but this belief tends to be
dispelled by the fact that what common sense regards as the appearance
of one object changes with what common sense regards as changes in the
point of view and in the intervening medium, including in the latter our
own sense-organs and nerves and brain. This fact, as just stated,
assumes, however, the common-sense world of stable objects which it
professes to call in question; hence, before we can discover its precise
bearing on our problem, we must find a way of stating it which does not
involve any of the assumptions which it is designed to render doubtful.
What we then find, as the bare outcome of experience, is that gradual
changes in certain sense-data are correlated with gradual changes in
certain others, or (in the case of bodily motions) with the other
sense-data themselves.

The assumption that sensible objects persist after they have ceased to
be sensible--for example, that the hardness of a visible body, which has
been discovered by touch, continues when the body is no longer
touched--may be replaced by the statement that the _effects_ of sensible
objects persist, _i.e._ that what happens now can only be accounted for,
in many cases, by taking account of what happened at an earlier time.
Everything that one man, by his own personal experience, can verify in
the account of the world given by common sense and physics, will be
explicable by some such means, since verification consists merely in the
occurrence of an expected sense-datum. But what depends upon testimony,
whether heard or read, cannot be explained in this way, since testimony
depends upon the existence of minds other than our own, and thus
requires a knowledge of something not given in sense. But before
examining the question of our knowledge of other minds, let us return to
the question of the thing-in-itself, namely, to the theory that what
exists at times when we are not perceiving a given sensible object is
something quite unlike that object, something which, together with us
and our sense-organs, causes our sensations, but is never itself given
in sensation.

The thing-in-itself, when we start from common-sense assumptions, is a
fairly natural outcome of the difficulties due to the changing
appearances of what is supposed to be one object. It is supposed that
the table (for example) causes our sense-data of sight and touch, but
must, since these are altered by the point of view and the intervening
medium, be quite different from the sense-data to which it gives rise.
There is, in this theory, a tendency to a confusion from which it
derives some of its plausibility, namely, the confusion between a
sensation as a psychical occurrence and its object. A patch of colour,
even if it only exists when it is seen, is still something quite
different from the seeing of it: the seeing of it is mental, but the
patch of colour is not. This confusion, however, can be avoided without
our necessarily abandoning the theory we are examining. The objection to
it, I think, lies in its failure to realise the radical nature of the
reconstruction demanded by the difficulties to which it points. We
cannot speak legitimately of changes in the point of view and the
intervening medium until we have already constructed some world more
stable than that of momentary sensation. Our discussion of the blue
spectacles and the walk round the table has, I hope, made this clear.
But what remains far from clear is the nature of the reconstruction
required.

Although we cannot rest content with the above theory, in the terms in
which it is stated, we must nevertheless treat it with a certain
respect, for it is in outline the theory upon which physical science and
physiology are built, and it must, therefore, be susceptible of a true
interpretation. Let us see how this is to be done.

The first thing to realise is that there are no such things as
"illusions of sense." Objects of sense, even when they occur in dreams,
are the most indubitably real objects known to us. What, then, makes us
call them unreal in dreams? Merely the unusual nature of their
connection with other objects of sense. I dream that I am in America,
but I wake up and find myself in England without those intervening days
on the Atlantic which, alas! are inseparably connected with a "real"
visit to America. Objects of sense are called "real" when they have the
kind of connection with other objects of sense which experience has led
us to regard as normal; when they fail in this, they are called
"illusions." But what is illusory is only the inferences to which they
give rise; in themselves, they are every bit as real as the objects of
waking life. And conversely, the sensible objects of waking life must
not be expected to have any more intrinsic reality than those of dreams.
Dreams and waking life, in our first efforts at construction, must be
treated with equal respect; it is only by some reality not _merely_
sensible that dreams can be condemned.

Accepting the indubitable momentary reality of objects of sense, the
next thing to notice is the confusion underlying objections derived from
their changeableness. As we walk round the table, its aspect changes;
but it is thought impossible to maintain either that the table changes,
or that its various aspects can all "really" exist in the same place. If
we press one eyeball, we shall see two tables; but it is thought
preposterous to maintain that there are "really" two tables. Such
arguments, however, seem to involve the assumption that there can be
something more real than objects of sense. If we see two tables, then
there _are_ two visual tables. It is perfectly true that, at the same
moment, we may discover by touch that there is only one tactile table.
This makes us declare the two visual tables an illusion, because usually
one visual object corresponds to one tactile object. But all that we are
warranted in saying is that, in this case, the manner of correlation of
touch and sight is unusual. Again, when the aspect of the table changes
as we walk round it, and we are told there cannot be so many different
aspects in the same place, the answer is simple: what does the critic of
the table mean by "the same place"? The use of such a phrase presupposes
that all our difficulties have been solved; as yet, we have no right to
speak of a "place" except with reference to one given set of momentary
sense-data. When all are changed by a bodily movement, no place remains
the same as it was. Thus the difficulty, if it exists, has at least not
been rightly stated.

We will now make a new start, adopting a different method. Instead of
inquiring what is the minimum of assumption by which we can explain the
world of sense, we will, in order to have a model hypothesis as a help
for the imagination, construct one possible (not necessary) explanation
of the facts. It may perhaps then be possible to pare away what is
superfluous in our hypothesis, leaving a residue which may be regarded
as the abstract answer to our problem.

Let us imagine that each mind looks out upon the world, as in Leibniz's
monadology, from a point of view peculiar to itself; and for the sake of
simplicity let us confine ourselves to the sense of sight, ignoring
minds which are devoid of this sense. Each mind sees at each moment an
immensely complex three-dimensional world; but there is absolutely
nothing which is seen by two minds simultaneously. When we say that two
people see the same thing, we always find that, owing to difference of
point of view, there are differences, however slight, between their
immediate sensible objects. (I am here assuming the validity of
testimony, but as we are only constructing a _possible_ theory, that is
a legitimate assumption.) The three-dimensional world seen by one mind
therefore contains no place in common with that seen by another, for
places can only be constituted by the things in or around them. Hence we
may suppose, in spite of the differences between the different worlds,
that each exists entire exactly as it is perceived, and might be exactly
as it is even if it were not perceived. We may further suppose that
there are an infinite number of such worlds which are in fact
unperceived. If two men are sitting in a room, two somewhat similar
worlds are perceived by them; if a third man enters and sits between
them, a third world, intermediate between the two previous worlds,
begins to be perceived. It is true that we cannot reasonably suppose
just this world to have existed before, because it is conditioned by the
sense-organs, nerves, and brain of the newly arrived man; but we can
reasonably suppose that _some_ aspect of the universe existed from that
point of view, though no one was perceiving it. The system consisting of
all views of the universe perceived and unperceived, I shall call the
system of "perspectives"; I shall confine the expression "private
worlds" to such views of the universe as are actually perceived. Thus a
"private world" is a perceived "perspective"; but there may be any
number of unperceived perspectives.

Two men are sometimes found to perceive very similar perspectives, so
similar that they can use the same words to describe them. They say they
see the same table, because the differences between the two tables they
see are slight and not practically important. Thus it is possible,
sometimes, to establish a correlation by similarity between a great many
of the things of one perspective, and a great many of the things of
another. In case the similarity is very great, we say the points of view
of the two perspectives are near together in space; but this space in
which they are near together is totally different from the spaces inside
the two perspectives. It is a relation between the perspectives, and is
not in either of them; no one can perceive it, and if it is to be known
it can be only by inference. Between two perceived perspectives which
are similar, we can imagine a whole series of other perspectives, some
at least unperceived, and such that between any two, however similar,
there are others still more similar. In this way the space which
consists of relations between perspectives can be rendered continuous,
and (if we choose) three-dimensional.

We can now define the momentary common-sense "thing," as opposed to its
momentary appearances. By the similarity of neighbouring perspectives,
many objects in the one can be correlated with objects in the other,
namely, with the similar objects. Given an object in one perspective,
form the system of all the objects correlated with it in all the
perspectives; that system may be identified with the momentary
common-sense "thing." Thus an aspect of a "thing" is a member of the
system of aspects which _is_ the "thing" at that moment. (The
correlation of the times of different perspectives raises certain
complications, of the kind considered in the theory of relativity; but
we may ignore these at present.) All the aspects of a thing are real,
whereas the thing is a mere logical construction. It has, however, the
merit of being neutral as between different points of view, and of being
visible to more than one person, in the only sense in which it can ever
be visible, namely, in the sense that each sees one of its aspects.

It will be observed that, while each perspective contains its own space,
there is only one space in which the perspectives themselves are the
elements. There are as many private spaces as there are perspectives;
there are therefore at least as many as there are percipients, and there
may be any number of others which have a merely material existence and
are not seen by anyone. But there is only one perspective-space, whose
elements are single perspectives, each with its own private space. We
have now to explain how the private space of a single perspective is
correlated with part of the one all-embracing perspective space.

Perspective space is the system of "points of view" of private spaces
(perspectives), or, since "points of view" have not been defined, we may
say it is the system of the private spaces themselves. These private
spaces will each count as one point, or at any rate as one element, in
perspective space. They are ordered by means of their similarities.
Suppose, for example, that we start from one which contains the
appearance of a circular disc, such as would be called a penny, and
suppose this appearance, in the perspective in question, is circular,
not elliptic. We can then form a whole series of perspectives containing
a graduated series of circular aspects of varying sizes: for this
purpose we only have to move (as we say) towards the penny or away from
it. The perspectives in which the penny looks circular will be said to
lie on a straight line in perspective space, and their order on this
line will be that of the sizes of the circular aspects. Moreover--though
this statement must be noticed and subsequently examined--the
perspectives in which the penny looks big will be said to be nearer to
the penny than those in which it looks small. It is to be remarked also
that any other "thing" than our penny might have been chosen to define
the relations of our perspectives in perspective space, and that
experience shows that the same spatial order of perspectives would have
resulted.

In order to explain the correlation of private spaces with perspective
space, we have first to explain what is meant by "the place (in
perspective space) where a thing is." For this purpose, let us again
consider the penny which appears in many perspectives. We formed a
straight line of perspectives in which the penny looked circular, and we
agreed that those in which it looked larger were to be considered as
nearer to the penny. We can form another straight line of perspectives
in which the penny is seen end-on and looks like a straight line of a
certain thickness. These two lines will meet in a certain place in
perspective space, _i.e._ in a certain perspective, which may be defined
as "the place (in perspective space) where the penny is." It is true
that, in order to prolong our lines until they reach this place, we
shall have to make use of other things besides the penny, because, so
far as experience goes, the penny ceases to present any appearance after
we have come so near to it that it touches the eye. But this raises no
real difficulty, because the spatial order of perspectives is found
empirically to be independent of the particular "things" chosen for
defining the order. We can, for example, remove our penny and prolong
each of our two straight lines up to their intersection by placing other
pennies further off in such a way that the aspects of the one are
circular where those of our original penny were circular, and the
aspects of the other are straight where those of our original penny were
straight. There will then be just one perspective in which one of the
new pennies looks circular and the other straight. This will be, by
definition, the place where the original penny was in perspective space.

The above is, of course, only a first rough sketch of the way in which
our definition is to be reached. It neglects the size of the penny, and
it assumes that we can remove the penny without being disturbed by any
simultaneous changes in the positions of other things. But it is plain
that such niceties cannot affect the principle, and can only introduce
complications in its application.

Having now defined the perspective which is the place where a given
thing is, we can understand what is meant by saying that the
perspectives in which a thing looks large are nearer to the thing than
those in which it looks small: they are, in fact, nearer to the
perspective which is the place where the thing is.

We can now also explain the correlation between a private space and
parts of perspective space. If there is an aspect of a given thing in a
certain private space, then we correlate the place where this aspect is
in the private space with the place where the thing is in perspective
space.

We may define "here" as the place, in perspective space, which is
occupied by our private world. Thus we can now understand what is meant
by speaking of a thing as near to or far from "here." A thing is near to
"here" if the place where it is is near to my private world. We can also
understand what is meant by saying that our private world is inside our
head; for our private world is a place in perspective space, and may be
part of the place where our head is.

It will be observed that _two_ places in perspective space are
associated with every aspect of a thing: namely, the place where the
thing is, and the place which is the perspective of which the aspect in
question forms part. Every aspect of a thing is a member of two
different classes of aspects, namely: (1) the various aspects of the
thing, of which at most one appears in any given perspective; (2) the
perspective of which the given aspect is a member, _i.e._ that in which
the thing has the given aspect. The physicist naturally classifies
aspects in the first way, the psychologist in the second. The two places
associated with a single aspect correspond to the two ways of
classifying it. We may distinguish the two places as that _at_ which,
and that _from_ which, the aspect appears. The "place at which" is the
place of the thing to which the aspect belongs; the "place from which"
is the place of the perspective to which the aspect belongs.

Let us now endeavour to state the fact that the aspect which a thing
presents at a given place is affected by the intervening medium. The
aspects of a thing in different perspectives are to be conceived as
spreading outwards from the place where the thing is, and undergoing
various changes as they get further away from this place. The laws
according to which they change cannot be stated if we only take account
of the aspects that are near the thing, but require that we should also
take account of the things that are at the places from which these
aspects appear. This empirical fact can, therefore, be interpreted in
terms of our construction.

We have now constructed a largely hypothetical picture of the world,
which contains and places the experienced facts, including those derived
from testimony. The world we have constructed can, with a certain amount
of trouble, be used to interpret the crude facts of sense, the facts of
physics, and the facts of physiology. It is therefore a world which
_may_ be actual. It fits the facts, and there is no empirical evidence
against it; it also is free from logical impossibilities. But have we
any good reason to suppose that it is real? This brings us back to our
original problem, as to the grounds for believing in the existence of
anything outside my private world. What we have derived from our
hypothetical construction is that there are no grounds _against_ the
truth of this belief, but we have not derived any positive grounds in
its favour. We will resume this inquiry by taking up again the question
of testimony and the evidence for the existence of other minds.

It must be conceded to begin with that the argument in favour of the
existence of other people's minds cannot be conclusive. A phantasm of
our dreams will appear to have a mind--a mind to be annoying, as a rule.
It will give unexpected answers, refuse to conform to our desires, and
show all those other signs of intelligence to which we are accustomed in
the acquaintances of our waking hours. And yet, when we are awake, we do
not believe that the phantasm was, like the appearances of people in
waking life, representative of a private world to which we have no
direct access. If we are to believe this of the people we meet when we
are awake, it must be on some ground short of demonstration, since it is
obviously possible that what we call waking life may be only an
unusually persistent and recurrent nightmare. It may be that our
imagination brings forth all that other people seem to say to us, all
that we read in books, all the daily, weekly, monthly, and quarterly
journals that distract our thoughts, all the advertisements of soap and
all the speeches of politicians. This _may_ be true, since it cannot be
shown to be false, yet no one can really believe it. Is there any
_logical_ ground for regarding this possibility as improbable? Or is
there nothing beyond habit and prejudice?

The minds of other people are among our data, in the very wide sense in
which we used the word at first. That is to say, when we first begin to
reflect, we find ourselves already believing in them, not because of any
argument, but because the belief is natural to us. It is, however, a
psychologically derivative belief, since it results from observation of
people's bodies; and along with other such beliefs, it does not belong
to the hardest of hard data, but becomes, under the influence of
philosophic reflection, just sufficiently questionable to make us desire
some argument connecting it with the facts of sense.

The obvious argument is, of course, derived from analogy. Other people's
bodies behave as ours do when we have certain thoughts and feelings;
hence, by analogy, it is natural to suppose that such behaviour is
connected with thoughts and feelings like our own. Someone says, "Look
out!" and we find we are on the point of being killed by a motor-car; we
therefore attribute the words we heard to the person in question having
seen the motor-car first, in which case there are existing things of
which we are not directly conscious. But this whole scene, with our
inference, may occur in a dream, in which case the inference is
generally considered to be mistaken. Is there anything to make the
argument from analogy more cogent when we are (as we think) awake?

The analogy in waking life is only to be preferred to that in dreams on
the ground of its greater extent and consistency. If a man were to dream
every night about a set of people whom he never met by day, who had
consistent characters and grew older with the lapse of years, he might,
like the man in Calderon's play, find it difficult to decide which was
the dream-world and which was the so-called "real" world. It is only the
failure of our dreams to form a consistent whole either with each other
or with waking life that makes us condemn them. Certain uniformities are
observed in waking life, while dreams seem quite erratic. The natural
hypothesis would be that demons and the spirits of the dead visit us
while we sleep; but the modern mind, as a rule, refuses to entertain
this view, though it is hard to see what could be said against it. On
the other hand, the mystic, in moments of illumination, seems to awaken
from a sleep which has filled all his mundane life: the whole world of
sense becomes phantasmal, and he sees, with the clarity and
convincingness that belongs to our morning realisation after dreams, a
world utterly different from that of our daily cares and troubles. Who
shall condemn him? Who shall justify him? Or who shall justify the
seeming solidity of the common objects among which we suppose ourselves
to live?

The hypothesis that other people have minds must, I think, be allowed to
be not susceptible of any very strong support from the analogical
argument. At the same time, it is a hypothesis which systematises a vast
body of facts and never leads to any consequences which there is reason
to think false. There is therefore nothing to be said against its truth,
and good reason to use it as a working hypothesis. When once it is
admitted, it enables us to extend our knowledge of the sensible world by
testimony, and thus leads to the system of private worlds which we
assumed in our hypothetical construction. In actual fact, whatever we
may try to think as philosophers, we cannot help believing in the minds
of other people, so that the question whether our belief is justified
has a merely speculative interest. And if it is justified, then there is
no further difficulty of principle in that vast extension of our
knowledge, beyond our own private data, which we find in science and
common sense.

This somewhat meagre conclusion must not be regarded as the whole
outcome of our long discussion. The problem of the connection of sense
with objective reality has commonly been dealt with from a standpoint
which did not carry initial doubt so far as we have carried it; most
writers, consciously or unconsciously, have assumed that the testimony
of others is to be admitted, and therefore (at least by implication)
that others have minds. Their difficulties have arisen after this
admission, from the differences in the appearance which one physical
object presents to two people at the same time, or to one person at two
times between which it cannot be supposed to have changed. Such
difficulties have made people doubtful how far objective reality could
be known by sense at all, and have made them suppose that there were
positive arguments against the view that it can be so known. Our
hypothetical construction meets these arguments, and shows that the
account of the world given by common sense and physical science can be
interpreted in a way which is logically unobjectionable, and finds a
place for all the data, both hard and soft. It is this hypothetical
construction, with its reconciliation of psychology and physics, which
is the chief outcome of our discussion. Probably the construction is
only in part necessary as an initial assumption, and can be obtained
from more slender materials by the logical methods of which we shall
have an example in the definitions of points, instants, and particles;
but I do not yet know to what lengths this diminution in our initial
assumptions can be carried.




LECTURE IV

THE WORLD OF PHYSICS AND THE WORLD OF SENSE


Among the objections to the reality of objects of sense, there is one
which is derived from the apparent difference between matter as it
appears in physics and things as they appear in sensation. Men of
science, for the most part, are willing to condemn immediate data as
"merely subjective," while yet maintaining the truth of the physics
inferred from those data. But such an attitude, though it may be
_capable_ of justification, obviously stands in need of it; and the only
justification possible must be one which exhibits matter as a logical
construction from sense-data--unless, indeed, there were some wholly _a
priori_ principle by which unknown entities could be inferred from such
as are known. It is therefore necessary to find some way of bridging the
gulf between the world of physics and the world of sense, and it is this
problem which will occupy us in the present lecture. Physicists appear
to be unconscious of the gulf, while psychologists, who are conscious of
it, have not the mathematical knowledge required for spanning it. The
problem is difficult, and I do not know its solution in detail. All that
I can hope to do is to make the problem felt, and to indicate the kind
of methods by which a solution is to be sought.

Let us begin by a brief description of the two contrasted worlds. We
will take first the world of physics, for, though the other world is
given while the physical world is inferred, to us now the world of
physics is the more familiar, the world of pure sense having become
strange and difficult to rediscover. Physics started from the
common-sense belief in fairly permanent and fairly rigid bodies--tables
and chairs, stones, mountains, the earth and moon and sun. This
common-sense belief, it should be noticed, is a piece of audacious
metaphysical theorising; objects are not continually present to
sensation, and it may be doubted whether they are there when they are
not seen or felt. This problem, which has been acute since the time of
Berkeley, is ignored by common sense, and has therefore hitherto been
ignored by physicists. We have thus here a first departure from the
immediate data of sensation, though it is a departure merely by way of
extension, and was probably made by our savage ancestors in some very
remote prehistoric epoch.

But tables and chairs, stones and mountains, are not _quite_ permanent
or _quite_ rigid. Tables and chairs lose their legs, stones are split by
frost, and mountains are cleft by earthquakes and eruptions. Then there
are other things, which seem material, and yet present almost no
permanence or rigidity. Breath, smoke, clouds, are examples of such
things--so, in a lesser degree, are ice and snow; and rivers and seas,
though fairly permanent, are not in any degree rigid. Breath, smoke,
clouds, and generally things that can be seen but not touched, were
thought to be hardly real; to this day the usual mark of a ghost is that
it can be seen but not touched. Such objects were peculiar in the fact
that they seemed to disappear completely, not merely to be transformed
into something else. Ice and snow, when they disappear, are replaced by
water; and it required no great theoretical effort to invent the
hypothesis that the water was the same thing as the ice and snow, but in
a new form. Solid bodies, when they break, break into parts which are
practically the same in shape and size as they were before. A stone can
be hammered into a powder, but the powder consists of grains which
retain the character they had before the pounding. Thus the ideal of
absolutely rigid and absolutely permanent bodies, which early physicists
pursued throughout the changing appearances, seemed attainable by
supposing ordinary bodies to be composed of a vast number of tiny atoms.
This billiard-ball view of matter dominated the imagination of
physicists until quite modern times, until, in fact, it was replaced by
the electromagnetic theory, which in its turn is developing into a new
atomism. Apart from the special form of the atomic theory which was
invented for the needs of chemistry, some kind of atomism dominated the
whole of traditional dynamics, and was implied in every statement of its
laws and axioms.

The pictorial accounts which physicists give of the material world as
they conceive it undergo violent changes under the influence of
modifications in theory which are much slighter than the layman might
suppose from the alterations of the description. Certain features,
however, have remained fairly stable. It is always assumed that there is
_something_ indestructible which is capable of motion in space; what is
indestructible is always very small, but does not always occupy a mere
point in space. There is supposed to be one all-embracing space in which
the motion takes place, and until lately we might have assumed one
all-embracing time also. But the principle of relativity has given
prominence to the conception of "local time," and has somewhat
diminished men's confidence in the one even-flowing stream of time.
Without dogmatising as to the ultimate outcome of the principle of
relativity, however, we may safely say, I think, that it does not
destroy the possibility of correlating different local times, and does
not therefore have such far-reaching philosophical consequences as is
sometimes supposed. In fact, in spite of difficulties as to measurement,
the one all-embracing time still, I think, underlies all that physics
has to say about motion. We thus have still in physics, as we had in
Newton's time, a set of indestructible entities which may be called
particles, moving relatively to each other in a single space and a
single time.

The world of immediate data is quite different from this. Nothing is
permanent; even the things that we think are fairly permanent, such as
mountains, only become data when we see them, and are not immediately
given as existing at other moments. So far from one all-embracing space
being given, there are several spaces for each person, according to the
different senses which give relations that may be called spatial.
Experience teaches us to obtain one space from these by correlation, and
experience, together with instinctive theorising, teaches us to
correlate our spaces with those which we believe to exist in the
sensible worlds of other people. The construction of a single time
offers less difficulty so long as we confine ourselves to one person's
private world, but the correlation of one private time with another is a
matter of great difficulty. Thus, apart from any of the fluctuating
hypotheses of physics, three main problems arise in connecting the world
of physics with the world of sense, namely (1) the construction of
permanent "things," (2) the construction of a single space, and (3) the
construction of a single time. We will consider these three problems in
succession.

(1) The belief in indestructible "things" very early took the form of
atomism. The underlying motive in atomism was not, I think, any
empirical success in interpreting phenomena, but rather an instinctive
belief that beneath all the changes of the sensible world there must be
something permanent and unchanging. This belief was, no doubt, fostered
and nourished by its practical successes, culminating in the
conservation of mass; but it was not produced by these successes. On the
contrary, they were produced by it. Philosophical writers on physics
sometimes speak as though the conservation of something or other were
essential to the possibility of science, but this, I believe, is an
entirely erroneous opinion. If the _a priori_ belief in permanence had
not existed, the same laws which are now formulated in terms of this
belief might just as well have been formulated without it. Why should we
suppose that, when ice melts, the water which replaces it is the same
thing in a new form? Merely because this supposition enables us to state
the phenomena in a way which is consonant with our prejudices. What we
really know is that, under certain conditions of temperature, the
appearance we call ice is replaced by the appearance we call water. We
can give laws according to which the one appearance will be succeeded by
the other, but there is no reason except prejudice for regarding both as
appearances of the same substance.

One task, if what has just been said is correct, which confronts us in
trying to connect the world of sense with the world of physics, is the
task of reconstructing the conception of matter without the _a priori_
beliefs which historically gave rise to it. In spite of the
revolutionary results of modern physics, the empirical successes of the
conception of matter show that there must be some legitimate conception
which fulfils roughly the same functions. The time has hardly come when
we can state precisely what this legitimate conception is, but we can
see in a general way what it must be like. For this purpose, it is only
necessary to take our ordinary common-sense statements and reword them
without the assumption of permanent substance. We say, for example, that
things change gradually--sometimes very quickly, but not without passing
through a continuous series of intermediate states. What this means is
that, given any sensible appearance, there will usually be, _if we
watch_, a continuous series of appearances connected with the given one,
leading on by imperceptible gradations to the new appearances which
common-sense regards as those of the same thing. Thus a thing may be
defined as a certain series of appearances, connected with each other by
continuity and by certain causal laws. In the case of slowly changing
things, this is easily seen. Consider, say, a wall-paper which fades in
the course of years. It is an effort not to conceive of it as one
"thing" whose colour is slightly different at one time from what it is
at another. But what do we really _know_ about it? We know that under
suitable circumstances--_i.e._ when we are, as is said, "in the
room"--we perceive certain colours in a certain pattern: not always
precisely the same colours, but sufficiently similar to feel familiar.
If we can state the laws according to which the colour varies, we can
state all that is empirically verifiable; the assumption that there is a
constant entity, the wall-paper, which "has" these various colours at
various times, is a piece of gratuitous metaphysics. We may, if we like,
_define_ the wall-paper as the series of its aspects. These are
collected together by the same motives which led us to regard the
wall-paper as one thing, namely a combination of sensible continuity and
causal connection. More generally, a "thing" will be defined as a
certain series of aspects, namely those which would commonly be said to
be _of_ the thing. To say that a certain aspect is an aspect _of_ a
certain thing will merely mean that it is one of those which, taken
serially, _are_ the thing. Everything will then proceed as before:
whatever was verifiable is unchanged, but our language is so interpreted
as to avoid an unnecessary metaphysical assumption of permanence.

The above extrusion of permanent things affords an example of the maxim
which inspires all scientific philosophising, namely "Occam's razor":
_Entities are not to be multiplied without necessity._ In other words,
in dealing with any subject-matter, find out what entities are
undeniably involved, and state everything in terms of these entities.
Very often the resulting statement is more complicated and difficult
than one which, like common sense and most philosophy, assumes
hypothetical entities whose existence there is no good reason to believe
in. We find it easier to imagine a wall-paper with changing colours than
to think merely of the series of colours; but it is a mistake to suppose
that what is easy and natural in thought is what is most free from
unwarrantable assumptions, as the case of "things" very aptly
illustrates.

The above summary account of the genesis of "things," though it may be
correct in outline, has omitted some serious difficulties which it is
necessary briefly to consider. Starting from a world of helter-skelter
sense-data, we wish to collect them into series, each of which can be
regarded as consisting of the successive appearances of one "thing."
There is, to begin with, some conflict between what common sense regards
as one thing, and what physics regards an unchanging collection of
particles. To common sense, a human body is one thing, but to science
the matter composing it is continually changing. This conflict, however,
is not very serious, and may, for our rough preliminary purpose, be
largely ignored. The problem is: by what principles shall we select
certain data from the chaos, and call them all appearances of the same
thing?

A rough and approximate answer to this question is not very difficult.
There are certain fairly stable collections of appearances, such as
landscapes, the furniture of rooms, the faces of acquaintances. In these
cases, we have little hesitation in regarding them on successive
occasions as appearances of one thing or collection of things. But, as
the _Comedy of Errors_ illustrates, we may be led astray if we judge by
mere resemblance. This shows that something more is involved, for two
different things may have any degree of likeness up to exact similarity.

Another insufficient criterion of one thing is _continuity_. As we have
already seen, if we watch what we regard as one changing thing, we
usually find its changes to be continuous so far as our senses can
perceive. We are thus led to assume that, if we see two finitely
different appearances at two different times, and if we have reason to
regard them as belonging to the same thing, then there was a continuous
series of intermediate states of that thing during the time when we were
not observing it. And so it comes to be thought that continuity of
change is necessary and sufficient to constitute one thing. But in fact
it is neither. It is not _necessary_, because the unobserved states, in
the case where our attention has not been concentrated on the thing
throughout, are purely hypothetical, and cannot possibly be our ground
for supposing the earlier and later appearances to belong to the same
thing; on the contrary, it is because we suppose this that we assume
intermediate unobserved states. Continuity is also not sufficient, since
we can, for example, pass by sensibly continuous gradations from any one
drop of the sea to any other drop. The utmost we can say is that
discontinuity during uninterrupted observation is as a rule a mark of
difference between things, though even this cannot be said in such cases
as sudden explosions.

The assumption of continuity is, however, successfully made in physics.
This proves something, though not anything of very obvious utility to
our present problem: it proves that nothing in the known world is
inconsistent with the hypothesis that all changes are really continuous,
though from too great rapidity or from our lack of observation they may
not always appear continuous. In this hypothetical sense, continuity may
be allowed to be a _necessary_ condition if two appearances are to be
classed as appearances of the same thing. But it is not a _sufficient_
condition, as appears from the instance of the drops in the sea. Thus
something more must be sought before we can give even the roughest
definition of a "thing."

What is wanted further seems to be something in the nature of fulfilment
of causal laws. This statement, as it stands, is very vague, but we will
endeavour to give it precision. When I speak of "causal laws," I mean
any laws which connect events at different times, or even, as a limiting
case, events at the same time provided the connection is not logically
demonstrable. In this very general sense, the laws of dynamics are
causal laws, and so are the laws correlating the simultaneous
appearances of one "thing" to different senses. The question is: How do
such laws help in the definition of a "thing"?

To answer this question, we must consider what it is that is proved by
the empirical success of physics. What is proved is that its hypotheses,
though unverifiable where they go beyond sense-data, are at no point in
contradiction with sense-data, but, on the contrary, are ideally such as
to render all sense-data calculable from a sufficient collection of data
all belonging to a given period of time. Now physics has found it
empirically possible to collect sense-data into series, each series
being regarded as belonging to one "thing," and behaving, with regard to
the laws of physics, in a way in which series not belonging to one thing
would in general not behave. If it is to be unambiguous whether two
appearances belong to the same thing or not, there must be only one way
of grouping appearances so that the resulting things obey the laws of
physics. It would be very difficult to prove that this is the case, but
for our present purposes we may let this point pass, and assume that
there is only one way. We must include in our definition of a "thing"
those of its aspects, if any, which are not observed. Thus we may lay
down the following definition: _Things are those series of aspects which
obey the laws of physics._ That such series exist is an empirical fact,
which constitutes the verifiability of physics.

It may still be objected that the "matter" of physics is something other
than series of sense-data. Sense-data, it may be said, belong to
psychology and are, at any rate in some sense, subjective, whereas
physics is quite independent of psychological considerations, and does
not assume that its matter only exists when it is perceived.

To this objection there are two answers, both of some importance.

(a) We have been considering, in the above account, the question of the
_verifiability_ of physics. Now verifiability is by no means the same
thing as truth; it is, in fact, something far more subjective and
psychological. For a proposition to be verifiable, it is not enough that
it should be true, but it must also be such as we can _discover_ to be
true. Thus verifiability depends upon our capacity for acquiring
knowledge, and not only upon the objective truth. In physics, as
ordinarily set forth, there is much that is unverifiable: there are
hypotheses as to () how things would appear to a spectator in a place
where, as it happens, there is no spectator; () how things would appear
at times when, in fact, they are not appearing to anyone; () things
which never appear at all. All these are introduced to simplify the
statement of the causal laws, but none of them form an integral part of
what is _known_ to be true in physics. This brings us to our second
answer.

(b) If physics is to consist wholly of propositions known to be true, or
at least capable of being proved or disproved, the three kinds of
hypothetical entities we have just enumerated must all be capable of
being exhibited as logical functions of sense-data. In order to show how
this might possibly be done, let us recall the hypothetical Leibnizian
universe of Lecture III. In that universe, we had a number of
perspectives, two of which never had any entity in common, but often
contained entities which could be sufficiently correlated to be regarded
as belonging to the same thing. We will call one of these an "actual"
private world when there is an actual spectator to which it appears, and
"ideal" when it is merely constructed on principles of continuity. A
physical thing consists, at each instant, of the whole set of its
aspects at that instant, in all the different worlds; thus a momentary
state of a thing is a whole set of aspects. An "ideal" appearance will
be an aspect merely calculated, but not actually perceived by any
spectator. An "ideal" state of a thing will be a state at a moment when
all its appearances are ideal. An ideal thing will be one whose states
at all times are ideal. Ideal appearances, states, and things, since
they are calculated, must be functions of actual appearances, states,
and things; in fact, ultimately, they must be functions of actual
appearances. Thus it is unnecessary, for the enunciation of the laws of
physics, to assign any reality to ideal elements: it is enough to accept
them as logical constructions, provided we have means of knowing how to
determine when they become actual. This, in fact, we have with some
degree of approximation; the starry heaven, for instance, becomes actual
whenever we choose to look at it. It is open to us to believe that the
ideal elements exist, and there can be no reason for _dis_believing
this; but unless in virtue of some _a priori_ law we cannot _know_ it,
for empirical knowledge is confined to what we actually observe.

(2) The three main conceptions of physics are space, time, and matter.
Some of the problems raised by the conception of matter have been
indicated in the above discussion of "things." But space and time also
raise difficult problems of much the same kind, namely, difficulties in
reducing the haphazard untidy world of immediate sensation to the smooth
orderly world of geometry and kinematics. Let us begin with the
consideration of space.

People who have never read any psychology seldom realise how much mental
labour has gone into the construction of the one all-embracing space
into which all sensible objects are supposed to fit. Kant, who was
unusually ignorant of psychology, described space as "an infinite given
whole," whereas a moment's psychological reflection shows that a space
which is infinite is not given, while a space which can be called given
is not infinite. What the nature of "given" space really is, is a
difficult question, upon which psychologists are by no means agreed. But
some general remarks may be made, which will suffice to show the
problems, without taking sides on any psychological issue still in
debate.

The first thing to notice is that different senses have different
spaces. The space of sight is quite different from the space of touch:
it is only by experience in infancy that we learn to correlate them. In
later life, when we see an object within reach, we know how to touch it,
and more or less what it will feel like; if we touch an object with our
eyes shut, we know where we should have to look for it, and more or less
what it would look like. But this knowledge is derived from early
experience of the correlation of certain kinds of touch-sensations with
certain kinds of sight-sensations. The one space into which both kinds
of sensations fit is an intellectual construction, not a datum. And
besides touch and sight, there are other kinds of sensation which give
other, though less important spaces: these also have to be fitted into
the one space by means of experienced correlations. And as in the case
of things, so here: the one all-embracing space, though convenient as a
way of speaking, need not be supposed really to exist. All that
experience makes certain is the several spaces of the several senses,
correlated by empirically discovered laws. The one space may turn out to
be valid as a logical construction, compounded of the several spaces,
but there is no good reason to assume its independent metaphysical
reality.

Another respect in which the spaces of immediate experience differ from
the space of geometry and physics is in regard to _points_. The space of
geometry and physics consists of an infinite number of points, but no
one has ever seen or touched a point. If there are points in a sensible
space, they must be an inference. It is not easy to see any way in
which, as independent entities, they could be validly inferred from the
data; thus here again, we shall have, if possible, to find some logical
construction, some complex assemblage of immediately given objects,
which will have the geometrical properties required of points. It is
customary to think of points as simple and infinitely small, but
geometry in no way demands that we should think of them in this way. All
that is necessary for geometry is that they should have mutual relations
possessing certain enumerated abstract properties, and it may be that an
assemblage of data of sensation will serve this purpose. Exactly how
this is to be done, I do not yet know, but it seems fairly certain that
it can be done.

The following illustrative method, simplified so as to be easily
manipulated, has been invented by Dr Whitehead for the purpose of
showing how points might be manufactured from sense-data. We have first
of all to observe that there are no infinitesimal sense-data: any
surface we can see, for example, must be of some finite extent. But what
at first appears as one undivided whole is often found, under the
influence of attention, to split up into parts contained within the
whole. Thus one spatial object may be contained within another, and
entirely enclosed by the other. This relation of enclosure, by the help
of some very natural hypotheses, will enable us to define a "point" as a
certain class of spatial objects, namely all those (as it will turn out
in the end) which would naturally be said to contain the point. In order
to obtain a definition of a "point" in this way, we proceed as follows:

Given any set of volumes or surfaces, they will not in general converge
into one point. But if they get smaller and smaller, while of any two of
the set there is always one that encloses the other, then we begin to
have the kind of conditions which would enable us to treat them as
having a point for their limit. The hypotheses required for the relation
of enclosure are that (1) it must be transitive; (2) of two _different_
spatial objects, it is impossible for each to enclose the other, but a
single spatial object always encloses itself; (3) any set of spatial
objects such that there is at least one spatial object enclosed by them
all has a lower limit or minimum, _i.e._ an object enclosed by all of
them and enclosing all objects which are enclosed by all of them; (4) to
prevent trivial exceptions, we must add that there are to be instances
of enclosure, _i.e._ there are really to be objects of which one
encloses the other. When an enclosure-relation has these properties, we
will call it a "point-producer." Given any relation of enclosure, we
will call a set of objects an "enclosure-series" if, of any two of them,
one is contained in the other. We require a condition which shall secure
that an enclosure-series converges to a point, and this is obtained as
follows: Let our enclosure-series be such that, given any other
enclosure-series of which there are members enclosed in any arbitrarily
chosen member of our first series, then there are members of our first
series enclosed in any arbitrarily chosen member of our second series.
In this case, our first enclosure-series may be called a "punctual
enclosure-series." Then a "point" is all the objects which enclose
members of a given punctual enclosure-series. In order to ensure
infinite divisibility, we require one further property to be added to
those defining point-producers, namely that any object which encloses
itself also encloses an object other than itself. The "points" generated
by point-producers with this property will be found to be such as
geometry requires.

(3) The question of time, so long as we confine ourselves to one private
world, is rather less complicated than that of space, and we can see
pretty clearly how it might be dealt with by such methods as we have
been considering. Events of which we are conscious do not last merely
for a mathematical instant, but always for some finite time, however
short. Even if there be a physical world such as the mathematical theory
of motion supposes, impressions on our sense-organs produce sensations
which are not merely and strictly instantaneous, and therefore the
objects of sense of which we are immediately conscious are not strictly
instantaneous. Instants, therefore, are not among the data of
experience, and, if legitimate, must be either inferred or constructed.
It is difficult to see how they can be validly inferred; thus we are
left with the alternative that they must be constructed. How is this to
be done?

Immediate experience provides us with two time-relations among events:
they may be simultaneous, or one may be earlier and the other later.
These two are both part of the crude data; it is not the case that only
the events are given, and their time-order is added by our subjective
activity. The time-order, within certain limits, is as much given as the
events. In any story of adventure you will find such passages as the
following: "With a cynical smile he pointed the revolver at the breast
of the dauntless youth. 'At the word _three_ I shall fire,' he said. The
words one and two had already been spoken with a cool and deliberate
distinctness. The word _three_ was forming on his lips. At this moment a
blinding flash of lightning rent the air." Here we have
simultaneity--not due, as Kant would have us believe, to the subjective
mental apparatus of the dauntless youth, but given as objectively as the
revolver and the lightning. And it is equally given in immediate
experience that the words _one_ and _two_ come earlier than the flash.
These time-relations hold between events which are not strictly
instantaneous. Thus one event may begin sooner than another, and
therefore be before it, but may continue after the other has begun, and
therefore be also simultaneous with it. If it persists after the other
is over, it will also be later than the other. Earlier, simultaneous,
and later, are not inconsistent with each other when we are concerned
with events which last for a finite time, however short; they only
become inconsistent when we are dealing with something instantaneous.

It is to be observed that we cannot give what may be called _absolute_
dates, but only dates determined by events. We cannot point to a time
itself, but only to some event occurring at that time. There is
therefore no reason in experience to suppose that there are times as
opposed to events: the events, ordered by the relations of simultaneity
and succession, are all that experience provides. Hence, unless we are
to introduce superfluous metaphysical entities, we must, in defining
what mathematical physics can regard as an instant, proceed by means of
some construction which assumes nothing beyond events and their temporal
relations.

If we wish to assign a date exactly by means of events, how shall we
proceed? If we take any one event, we cannot assign our date exactly,
because the event is not instantaneous, that is to say, it may be
simultaneous with two events which are not simultaneous with each other.
In order to assign a date exactly, we must be able, theoretically, to
determine whether any given event is before, at, or after this date, and
we must know that any other date is either before or after this date,
but not simultaneous with it. Suppose, now, instead of taking one event
A, we take two events A and B, and suppose A and B partly overlap, but B
ends before A ends. Then an event which is simultaneous with both A and
B must exist during the time when A and B overlap; thus we have come
rather nearer to a precise date than when we considered A and B alone.
Let C be an event which is simultaneous with both A and B, but which
ends before either A or B has ended. Then an event which is simultaneous
with A and B and C must exist during the time when all three overlap,
which is a still shorter time. Proceeding in this way, by taking more
and more events, a new event which is dated as simultaneous with all of
them becomes gradually more and more accurately dated. This suggests a
way by which a completely accurate date can be defined.

        A____________________

    B____________________

            C________

Let us take a group of events of which any two overlap, so that there is
some time, however short, when they all exist. If there is any other
event which is simultaneous with all of these, let us add it to the
group; let us go on until we have constructed a group such that no event
outside the group is simultaneous with all of them, but all the events
inside the group are simultaneous with each other. Let us define this
whole group as an instant of time. It remains to show that it has the
properties we expect of an instant.

What are the properties we expect of instants? First, they must form a
series: of any two, one must be before the other, and the other must be
not before the one; if one is before another, and the other before a
third, the first must be before the third. Secondly, every event must be
at a certain number of instants; two events are simultaneous if they are
at the same instant, and one is before the other if there is an instant,
at which the one is, which is earlier than some instant at which the
other is. Thirdly, if we assume that there is always some change going
on somewhere during the time when any given event persists, the series
of instants ought to be compact, _i.e._ given any two instants, there
ought to be other instants between them. Do instants, as we have defined
them, have these properties?

We shall say that an event is "at" an instant when it is a member of the
group by which the instant is constituted; and we shall say that one
instant is before another if the group which is the one instant contains
an event which is earlier than, but not simultaneous with, some event in
the group which is the other instant. When one event is earlier than,
but not simultaneous with another, we shall say that it "wholly
precedes" the other. Now we know that of two events which are not
simultaneous, there must be one which wholly precedes the other, and in
that case the other cannot also wholly precede the one; we also know
that, if one event wholly precedes another, and the other wholly
precedes a third, then the first wholly precedes the third. From these
facts it is easy to deduce that the instants as we have defined them
form a series.

We have next to show that every event is "at" at least one instant,
_i.e._ that, given any event, there is at least one class, such as we
used in defining instants, of which it is a member. For this purpose,
consider all the events which are simultaneous with a given event, and
do not begin later, _i.e._ are not wholly after anything simultaneous
with it. We will call these the "initial contemporaries" of the given
event. It will be found that this class of events is the first instant
at which the given event exists, provided every event wholly after some
contemporary of the given event is wholly after some _initial_
contemporary of it.

Finally, the series of instants will be compact if, given any two events
of which one wholly precedes the other, there are events wholly after
the one and simultaneous with something wholly before the other. Whether
this is the case or not, is an empirical question; but if it is not,
there is no reason to expect the time-series to be compact.[17]

  [17] The assumptions made concerning time-relations in the above are
  as follows:--

    I. In order to secure that instants form a series, we assume:

      (a) No event wholly precedes itself. (An "event" is defined as
      whatever is simultaneous with something or other.)

      (b) If one event wholly precedes another, and the other wholly
      precedes a third, then the first wholly precedes the third.

      (c) If one event wholly precedes another, it is not simultaneous
      with it.

      (d) Of two events which are not simultaneous, one must wholly
      precede the other.

    II. In order to secure that the initial contemporaries of a given
    event should form an instant, we assume:

      (e) An event wholly after some contemporary of a given event is
      wholly after some _initial_ contemporary of the given event.

    III. In order to secure that the series of instants shall be
    compact, we assume:

      (f) If one event wholly precedes another, there is an event wholly
      after the one and simultaneous with something wholly before the
      other.

  This assumption entails the consequence that if one event covers the
  whole of a stretch of time immediately preceding another event, then
  it must have at least one instant in common with the other event;
  _i.e._ it is impossible for one event to cease just before another
  begins. I do not know whether this should be regarded as inadmissible.
  For a mathematico-logical treatment of the above topics, _cf._ N.
  Wilner, "A Contribution to the Theory of Relative Position," _Proc.
  Camb. Phil. Soc._, xvii. 5, pp. 441-449.

Thus our definition of instants secures all that mathematics requires,
without having to assume the existence of any disputable metaphysical
entities.

Instants may also be defined by means of the enclosure-relation, exactly
as was done in the case of points. One object will be temporally
enclosed by another when it is simultaneous with the other, but not
before or after it. Whatever encloses temporally or is enclosed
temporally we shall call an "event." In order that the relation of
temporal enclosure may be a "point-producer," we require (1) that it
should be transitive, _i.e._ that if one event encloses another, and the
other a third, then the first encloses the third; (2) that every event
encloses itself, but if one event encloses another different event, then
the other does not enclose the one; (3) that given any set of events
such that there is at least one event enclosed by all of them, then
there is an event enclosing all that they all enclose, and itself
enclosed by all of them; (4) that there is at least one event. To ensure
infinite divisibility, we require also that every event should enclose
events other than itself. Assuming these characteristics, temporal
enclosure is an infinitely divisible point-producer. We can now form an
"enclosure-series" of events, by choosing a group of events such that of
any two there is one which encloses the other; this will be a "punctual
enclosure-series" if, given any other enclosure-series such that every
member of our first series encloses some member of our second, then
every member of our second series encloses some member of our first.
Then an "instant" is the class of all events which enclose members of a
given punctual enclosure-series.

The correlation of the times of different private worlds so as to
produce the one all-embracing time of physics is a more difficult
matter. We saw, in Lecture III., that different private worlds often
contain correlated appearances, such as common sense would regard as
appearances of the same "thing." When two appearances in different
worlds are so correlated as to belong to one momentary "state" of a
thing, it would be natural to regard them as simultaneous, and as thus
affording a simple means of correlating different private times. But
this can only be regarded as a first approximation. What we call one
sound will be heard sooner by people near the source of the sound than
by people further from it, and the same applies, though in a less
degree, to light. Thus two correlated appearances in different worlds
are not necessarily to be regarded as occurring at the same date in
physical time, though they will be parts of one momentary state of a
thing. The correlation of different private times is regulated by the
desire to secure the simplest possible statement of the laws of physics,
and thus raises rather complicated technical problems; but from the
point of view of philosophical theory, there is no very serious
difficulty of principle involved.

The above brief outline must not be regarded as more than tentative and
suggestive. It is intended merely to show the kind of way in which,
given a world with the kind of properties that psychologists find in the
world of sense, it may be possible, by means of purely logical
constructions, to make it amenable to mathematical treatment by defining
series or classes of sense-data which can be called respectively
particles, points, and instants. If such constructions are possible,
then mathematical physics is applicable to the real world, in spite of
the fact that its particles, points, and instants are not to be found
among actually existing entities.

The problem which the above considerations are intended to elucidate is
one whose importance and even existence has been concealed by the
unfortunate separation of different studies which prevails throughout
the civilised world. Physicists, ignorant and contemptuous of
philosophy, have been content to assume their particles, points, and
instants in practice, while conceding, with ironical politeness, that
their concepts laid no claim to metaphysical validity. Metaphysicians,
obsessed by the idealistic opinion that only mind is real, and the
Parmenidean belief that the real is unchanging, repeated one after
another the supposed contradictions in the notions of matter, space, and
time, and therefore naturally made no endeavour to invent a tenable
theory of particles, points, and instants. Psychologists, who have done
invaluable work in bringing to light the chaotic nature of the crude
materials supplied by unmanipulated sensation, have been ignorant of
mathematics and modern logic, and have therefore been content to say
that matter, space, and time are "intellectual constructions," without
making any attempt to show in detail either how the intellect can
construct them, or what secures the practical validity which physics
shows them to possess. Philosophers, it is to be hoped, will come to
recognise that they cannot achieve any solid success in such problems
without some slight knowledge of logic, mathematics, and physics;
meanwhile, for want of students with the necessary equipment, this vital
problem remains unattempted and unknown.

There are, it is true, two authors, both physicists, who have done
something, though not much, to bring about a recognition of the problem
as one demanding study. These two authors are Poincar and Mach,
Poincar especially in his _Science and Hypothesis_, Mach especially in
his _Analysis of Sensations_. Both of them, however, admirable as their
work is, seem to me to suffer from a general philosophical bias.
Poincar is Kantian, while Mach is ultra-empiricist; with Poincar
almost all the mathematical part of physics is merely conventional,
while with Mach the sensation as a mental event is identified with its
object as a part of the physical world. Nevertheless, both these
authors, and especially Mach, deserve mention as having made serious
contributions to the consideration of our problem.

When a point or an instant is defined as a class of sensible qualities,
the first impression produced is likely to be one of wild and wilful
paradox. Certain considerations apply here, however, which will again be
relevant when we come to the definition of numbers. There is a whole
type of problems which can be solved by such definitions, and almost
always there will be at first an effect of paradox. Given a set of
objects any two of which have a relation of the sort called "symmetrical
and transitive," it is almost certain that we shall come to regard them
as all having some common quality, or as all having the same relation to
some one object outside the set. This kind of case is important, and I
shall therefore try to make it clear even at the cost of some repetition
of previous definitions.

A relation is said to be "symmetrical" when, if one term has this
relation to another, then the other also has it to the one. Thus
"brother or sister" is a "symmetrical" relation: if one person is a
brother or a sister of another, then the other is a brother or sister of
the one. Simultaneity, again, is a symmetrical relation; so is equality
in size. A relation is said to be "transitive" when, if one term has
this relation to another, and the other to a third, then the one has it
to the third. The symmetrical relations mentioned just now are also
transitive--provided, in the case of "brother or sister," we allow a
person to be counted as his or her own brother or sister, and provided,
in the case of simultaneity, we mean complete simultaneity, _i.e._
beginning and ending together.

But many relations are transitive without being symmetrical--for
instance, such relations as "greater," "earlier," "to the right of,"
"ancestor of," in fact all such relations as give rise to series. Other
relations are symmetrical without being transitive--for example,
difference in any respect. If A is of a different age from B, and B of a
different age from C, it does not follow that A is of a different age
from C. Simultaneity, again, in the case of events which last for a
finite time, will not necessarily be transitive if it only means that
the times of the two events overlap. If A ends just after B has begun,
and B ends just after C has begun, A and B will be simultaneous in this
sense, and so will B and C, but A and C may well not be simultaneous.

All the relations which can naturally be represented as equality in any
respect, or as possession of a common property, are transitive and
symmetrical--this applies, for example, to such relations as being of
the same height or weight or colour. Owing to the fact that possession
of a common property gives rise to a transitive symmetrical relation, we
come to imagine that wherever such a relation occurs it must be due to a
common property. "Being equally numerous" is a transitive symmetrical
relation of two collections; hence we imagine that both have a common
property, called their number. "Existing at a given instant" (in the
sense in which we defined an instant) is a transitive symmetrical
relation; hence we come to think that there really is an instant which
confers a common property on all the things existing at that instant.
"Being states of a given thing" is a transitive symmetrical relation;
hence we come to imagine that there really is a thing, other than the
series of states, which accounts for the transitive symmetrical
relation. In all such cases, the class of terms that have the given
transitive symmetrical relation to a given term will fulfil all the
formal requisites of a common property of all the members of the class.
Since there certainly is the class, while any other common property may
be illusory, it is prudent, in order to avoid needless assumptions, to
substitute the class for the common property which would be ordinarily
assumed. This is the reason for the definitions we have adopted, and
this is the source of the apparent paradoxes. No harm is done if there
are such common properties as language assumes, since we do not deny
them, but merely abstain from asserting them. But if there are not such
common properties in any given case, then our method has secured us
against error. In the absence of special knowledge, therefore, the
method we have adopted is the only one which is safe, and which avoids
the risk of introducing fictitious metaphysical entities.




LECTURE V

THE THEORY OF CONTINUITY


The theory of continuity, with which we shall be occupied in the present
lecture, is, in most of its refinements and developments, a purely
mathematical subject--very beautiful, very important, and very
delightful, but not, strictly speaking, a part of philosophy. The
logical basis of the theory alone belongs to philosophy, and alone will
occupy us to-night. The way the problem of continuity enters into
philosophy is, broadly speaking, the following: Space and time are
treated by mathematicians as consisting of points and instants, but they
also have a property, easier to feel than to define, which is called
continuity, and is thought by many philosophers to be destroyed when
they are resolved into points and instants. Zeno, as we shall see,
proved that analysis into points and instants was impossible if we
adhered to the view that the number of points or instants in a finite
space or time must be finite. Later philosophers, believing infinite
number to be self-contradictory, have found here an antinomy: Spaces and
times could not consist of a _finite_ number of points and instants, for
such reasons as Zeno's; they could not consist of an _infinite_ number
of points and instants, because infinite numbers were supposed to be
self-contradictory. Therefore spaces and times, if real at all, must not
be regarded as composed of points and instants.

But even when points and instants, as independent entities, are
discarded, as they were by the theory advocated in our last lecture, the
problems of continuity, as I shall try to show presently, remain, in a
practically unchanged form. Let us therefore, to begin with, admit
points and instants, and consider the problems in connection with this
simpler or at least more familiar hypothesis.

The argument against continuity, in so far as it rests upon the supposed
difficulties of infinite numbers, has been disposed of by the positive
theory of the infinite, which will be considered in Lecture VII. But
there remains a feeling--of the kind that led Zeno to the contention
that the arrow in its flight is at rest--which suggests that points and
instants, even if they are infinitely numerous, can only give a jerky
motion, a succession of different immobilities, not the smooth
transitions with which the senses have made us familiar. This feeling is
due, I believe, to a failure to realise imaginatively, as well as
abstractly, the nature of continuous series as they appear in
mathematics. When a theory has been apprehended logically, there is
often a long and serious labour still required in order to _feel_ it: it
is necessary to dwell upon it, to thrust out from the mind, one by one,
the misleading suggestions of false but more familiar theories, to
acquire the kind of intimacy which, in the case of a foreign language,
would enable us to think and dream in it, not merely to construct
laborious sentences by the help of grammar and dictionary. It is, I
believe, the absence of this kind of intimacy which makes many
philosophers regard the mathematical doctrine of continuity as an
inadequate explanation of the continuity which we experience in the
world of sense.

In the present lecture, I shall first try to explain in outline what the
mathematical theory of continuity is in its philosophically important
essentials. The application to actual space and time will not be in
question to begin with. I do not see any reason to suppose that the
points and instants which mathematicians introduce in dealing with space
and time are actual physically existing entities, but I do see reason to
suppose that the continuity of actual space and time may be more or less
analogous to mathematical continuity. The theory of mathematical
continuity is an abstract logical theory, not dependent for its validity
upon any properties of actual space and time. What is claimed for it is
that, when it is understood, certain characteristics of space and time,
previously very hard to analyse, are found not to present any logical
difficulty. What we know empirically about space and time is
insufficient to enable us to decide between various mathematically
possible alternatives, but these alternatives are all fully intelligible
and fully adequate to the observed facts. For the present, however, it
will be well to forget space and time and the continuity of sensible
change, in order to return to these topics equipped with the weapons
provided by the abstract theory of continuity.

Continuity, in mathematics, is a property only possible to a _series_ of
terms, _i.e._ to terms arranged in an order, so that we can say of any
two that one comes _before_ the other. Numbers in order of magnitude,
the points on a line from left to right, the moments of time from
earlier to later, are instances of series. The notion of order, which is
here introduced, is one which is not required in the theory of cardinal
number. It is possible to know that two classes have the same number of
terms without knowing any order in which they are to be taken. We have
an instance of this in such a case as English husbands and English
wives: we can see that there must be the same number of husbands as of
wives, without having to arrange them in a series. But continuity, which
we are now to consider, is essentially a property of an order: it does
not belong to a set of terms in themselves, but only to a set in a
certain order. A set of terms which can be arranged in one order can
always also be arranged in other orders, and a set of terms which can be
arranged in a continuous order can always also be arranged in orders
which are not continuous. Thus the essence of continuity must not be
sought in the nature of the set of terms, but in the nature of their
arrangement in a series.

Mathematicians have distinguished different degrees of continuity, and
have confined the word "continuous," for technical purposes, to series
having a certain high degree of continuity. But for philosophical
purposes, all that is important in continuity is introduced by the
lowest degree of continuity, which is called "compactness." A series is
called "compact" when no two terms are consecutive, but between any two
there are others. One of the simplest examples of a compact series is
the series of fractions in order of magnitude. Given any two fractions,
however near together, there are other fractions greater than the one
and smaller than the other, and therefore no two fractions are
consecutive. There is no fraction, for example, which is next after 1/2:
if we choose some fraction which is very little greater than 1/2, say
51/100 we can find others, such as 101/200, which are nearer to 1/2.
Thus between any two fractions, however little they differ, there are an
infinite number of other fractions. Mathematical space and time also
have this property of compactness, though whether actual space and time
have it is a further question, dependent upon empirical evidence, and
probably incapable of being answered with certainty.

In the case of abstract objects such as fractions, it is perhaps not
very difficult to realise the logical possibility of their forming a
compact series. The difficulties that might be felt are those of
infinity, for in a compact series the number of terms between any two
given terms must be infinite. But when these difficulties have been
solved, the mere compactness in itself offers no great obstacle to the
imagination. In more concrete cases, however, such as motion,
compactness becomes much more repugnant to our habits of thought. It
will therefore be desirable to consider explicitly the mathematical
account of motion, with a view to making its logical possibility felt.
The mathematical account of motion is perhaps artificially simplified
when regarded as describing what actually occurs in the physical world;
but what actually occurs must be capable, by a certain amount of logical
manipulation, of being brought within the scope of the mathematical
account, and must, in its analysis, raise just such problems as are
raised in their simplest form by this account. Neglecting, therefore,
for the present, the question of its physical adequacy, let us devote
ourselves merely to considering its possibility as a formal statement of
the nature of motion.

In order to simplify our problem as much as possible, let us imagine a
tiny speck of light moving along a scale. What do we mean by saying that
the motion is continuous? It is not necessary for our purposes to
consider the whole of what the mathematician means by this statement:
only part of what he means is philosophically important. One part of
what he means is that, if we consider any two positions of the speck
occupied at any two instants, there will be other intermediate positions
occupied at intermediate instants. However near together we take the two
positions, the speck will not jump suddenly from the one to the other,
but will pass through an infinite number of other positions on the way.
Every distance, however small, is traversed by passing through all the
infinite series of positions between the two ends of the distance.

But at this point imagination suggests that we may describe the
continuity of motion by saying that the speck always passes from one
position at one instant to _the next_ position at _the next_ instant. As
soon as we say this or imagine it, we fall into error, because there is
no _next_ point or _next_ instant. If there were, we should find Zeno's
paradoxes, in some form, unavoidable, as will appear in our next
lecture. One simple paradox may serve as an illustration. If our speck
is in motion along the scale throughout the whole of a certain time, it
cannot be at the same point at two consecutive instants. But it cannot,
from one instant to the next, travel further than from one point to the
next, for if it did, there would be no instant at which it was in the
positions intermediate between that at the first instant and that at the
next, and we agreed that the continuity of motion excludes the
possibility of such sudden jumps. It follows that our speck must, so
long as it moves, pass from one point at one instant to the next point
at the next instant. Thus there will be just one perfectly definite
velocity with which all motions must take place: no motion can be faster
than this, and no motion can be slower. Since this conclusion is false,
we must reject the hypothesis upon which it is based, namely that there
are consecutive points and instants.[18] Hence the continuity of motion
must not be supposed to consist in a body's occupying consecutive
positions at consecutive times.

  [18] The above paradox is essentially the same as Zeno's argument of
  the stadium which will be considered in our next lecture.

The difficulty to imagination lies chiefly, I think, in keeping out the
suggestion of _infinitesimal_ distances and times. Suppose we halve a
given distance, and then halve the half, and so on, we can continue the
process as long as we please, and the longer we continue it, the smaller
the resulting distance becomes. This infinite divisibility seems, at
first sight, to imply that there are infinitesimal distances, _i.e._
distances so small that any finite fraction of an inch would be greater.
This, however, is an error. The continued bisection of our distance,
though it gives us continually smaller distances, gives us always
_finite_ distances. If our original distance was an inch, we reach
successively half an inch, a quarter of an inch, an eighth, a sixteenth,
and so on; but every one of this infinite series of diminishing
distances is finite. "But," it may be said, "_in the end_ the distance
will grow infinitesimal." No, because there is no end. The process of
bisection is one which can, theoretically, be carried on for ever,
without any last term being attained. Thus infinite divisibility of
distances, which must be admitted, does not imply that there are
distances so small that any finite distance would be larger.

It is easy, in this kind of question, to fall into an elementary logical
blunder. Given any finite distance, we can find a smaller distance; this
may be expressed in the ambiguous form "there is a distance smaller than
any finite distance." But if this is then interpreted as meaning "there
is a distance such that, whatever finite distance may be chosen, the
distance in question is smaller," then the statement is false. Common
language is ill adapted to expressing matters of this kind, and
philosophers who have been dependent on it have frequently been misled
by it.

In a continuous motion, then, we shall say that at any given instant the
moving body occupies a certain position, and at other instants it
occupies other positions; the interval between any two instants and
between any two positions is always finite, but the continuity of the
motion is shown in the fact that, however near together we take the two
positions and the two instants, there are an infinite number of
positions still nearer together, which are occupied at instants that are
also still nearer together. The moving body never jumps from one
position to another, but always passes by a gradual transition through
an infinite number of intermediaries. At a given instant, it is where it
is, like Zeno's arrow;[19] but we cannot say that it is at rest at the
instant, since the instant does not last for a finite time, and there is
not a beginning and end of the instant with an interval between them.
Rest consists in being in the same position at all the instants
throughout a certain finite period, however short; it does not consist
simply in a body's being where it is at a given instant. This whole
theory, as is obvious, depends upon the nature of compact series, and
demands, for its full comprehension, that compact series should have
become familiar and easy to the imagination as well as to deliberate
thought.

  [19] See next lecture.

What is required may be expressed in mathematical language by saying
that the position of a moving body must be a continuous function of the
time. To define accurately what this means, we proceed as follows.
Consider a particle which, at the moment _t_, is at the point P. Choose
now any small portion P1P2 of the path of the particle, this portion
being one which contains P. We say then that, if the motion of the
particle is continuous at the time _t_, it must be possible to find two
instants _t_1, _t_2, one earlier than _t_ and one later, such that
throughout the whole time from _t_1 to _t_2 (both included), the
particle lies between P1 and P2. And we say that this must still hold
however small we make the portion P1P2. When this is the case, we say
that the motion is continuous at the time _t_; and when the motion is
continuous at all times, we say that the motion as a whole is
continuous. It is obvious that if the particle were to jump suddenly
from P to some other point Q, our definition would fail for all
intervals P1P2 which were too small to include Q. Thus our definition
affords an analysis of the continuity of motion, while admitting points
and instants and denying infinitesimal distances in space or periods in
time.

        P1   P    P2   Q
  ------|----|----|----|------>

Philosophers, mostly in ignorance of the mathematician's analysis, have
adopted other and more heroic methods of dealing with the _prim facie_
difficulties of continuous motion. A typical and recent example of
philosophic theories of motion is afforded by Bergson, whose views on
this subject I have examined elsewhere.[20]

  [20] _Monist_, July 1912, pp. 337-341.

Apart from definite arguments, there are certain feelings, rather than
reasons, which stand in the way of an acceptance of the mathematical
account of motion. To begin with, if a body is moving at all fast, we
_see_ its motion just as we see its colour. A _slow_ motion, like that
of the hour-hand of a watch, is only known in the way which mathematics
would lead us to expect, namely by observing a change of position after
a lapse of time; but, when we observe the motion of the second-hand, we
do not merely see first one position and then another--we see something
as directly sensible as colour. What is this something that we see, and
that we call visible motion? Whatever it is, it is _not_ the successive
occupation of successive positions: something beyond the mathematical
theory of motion is required to account for it. Opponents of the
mathematical theory emphasise this fact. "Your theory," they say, "may
be very logical, and might apply admirably to some other world; but in
this actual world, actual motions are quite different from what your
theory would declare them to be, and require, therefore, some different
philosophy from yours for their adequate explanation."

The objection thus raised is one which I have no wish to underrate, but
I believe it can be fully answered without departing from the methods
and the outlook which have led to the mathematical theory of motion. Let
us, however, first try to state the objection more fully.

If the mathematical theory is adequate, nothing happens when a body
moves except that it is in different places at different times. But in
this sense the hour-hand and the second-hand are equally in motion, yet
in the second-hand there is something perceptible to our senses which is
absent in the hour-hand. We can see, at each moment, that the
second-hand _is moving_, which is different from seeing it first in one
place and then in another. This seems to involve our seeing it
simultaneously in a number of places, although it must also involve our
seeing that it is in some of these places earlier than in others. If,
for example, I move my hand quickly from left to right, you seem to see
the whole movement at once, in spite of the fact that you know it begins
at the left and ends at the right. It is this kind of consideration, I
think, which leads Bergson and many others to regard a movement as
really one indivisible whole, not the series of separate states imagined
by the mathematician.

To this objection there are three supplementary answers, physiological,
psychological, and logical. We will consider them successively.

(1) The physiological answer merely shows that, if the physical world is
what the mathematician supposes, its sensible appearance may
nevertheless be expected to be what it is. The aim of this answer is
thus the modest one of showing that the mathematical account is not
impossible as applied to the physical world; it does not even attempt to
show that this account is necessary, or that an analogous account
applies in psychology.

When any nerve is stimulated, so as to cause a sensation, the sensation
does not cease instantaneously with the cessation of the stimulus, but
dies away in a short finite time. A flash of lightning, brief as it is
to our sight, is briefer still as a physical phenomenon: we continue to
see it for a few moments after the light-waves have ceased to strike the
eye. Thus in the case of a physical motion, if it is sufficiently swift,
we shall actually at one instant see the moving body throughout a finite
portion of its course, and not only at the exact spot where it is at
that instant. Sensations, however, as they die away, grow gradually
fainter; thus the sensation due to a stimulus which is recently past is
not exactly like the sensation due to a present stimulus. It follows
from this that, when we see a rapid motion, we shall not only see a
number of positions of the moving body simultaneously, but we shall see
them with different degrees of intensity--the present position most
vividly, and the others with diminishing vividness, until sensation
fades away into immediate memory. This state of things accounts fully
for the perception of motion. A motion is _perceived_, not merely
_inferred_, when it is sufficiently swift for many positions to be
sensible at one time; and the earlier and later parts of one perceived
motion are distinguished by the less and greater vividness of the
sensations.

This answer shows that physiology can account for our perception of
motion. But physiology, in speaking of stimulus and sense-organs and a
physical motion distinct from the immediate object of sense, is assuming
the truth of physics, and is thus only capable of showing the physical
account to be possible, not of showing it to be _necessary_. This
consideration brings us to the psychological answer.

(2) The psychological answer to our difficulty about motion is part of a
vast theory, not yet worked out, and only capable, at present, of being
vaguely outlined. We considered this theory in the third and fourth
lectures; for the present, a mere sketch of its application to our
present problem must suffice. The world of physics, which was assumed in
the physiological answer, is obviously inferred from what is given in
sensation; yet as soon as we seriously consider what is actually given
in sensation, we find it apparently very different from the world of
physics. The question is thus forced upon us: Is the inference from
sense to physics a valid one? I believe the answer to be affirmative,
for reasons which I suggested in the third and fourth lectures; but the
answer cannot be either short or easy. It consists, broadly speaking, in
showing that, although the particles, points, and instants with which
physics operates are not themselves given in experience, and are very
likely not actually existing things, yet, out of the materials provided
in sensation, it is possible to make logical constructions having the
mathematical properties which physics assigns to particles, points, and
instants. If this can be done, then all the propositions of physics can
be translated, by a sort of dictionary, into propositions about the
kinds of objects which are given in sensation.

Applying these general considerations to the case of motion, we find
that, even within the sphere of immediate sense-data, it is necessary,
or at any rate more consonant with the facts than any other equally
simple view, to distinguish instantaneous states of objects, and to
regard such states as forming a compact series. Let us consider a body
which is moving swiftly enough for its motion to be perceptible, and
long enough for its motion to be not wholly comprised in one sensation.
Then, in spite of the fact that we see a finite extent of the motion at
one instant, the extent which we see at one instant is different from
that which we see at another. Thus we are brought back, after all, to a
series of momentary views of the moving body, and this series will be
compact, like the former physical series of points. In fact, though the
_terms_ of the series seem different, the mathematical character of the
series is unchanged, and the whole mathematical theory of motion will
apply to it _verbatim_.

When we are considering the actual data of sensation in this connection,
it is important to realise that two sense-data may be, and _must_
sometimes be, really different when we cannot perceive any difference
between them. An old but conclusive reason for believing this was
emphasised by Poincar.[21] In all cases of sense-data capable of
gradual change, we may find one sense-datum indistinguishable from
another, and that other indistinguishable from a third, while yet the
first and third are quite easily distinguishable. Suppose, for example,
a person with his eyes shut is holding a weight in his hand, and someone
noiselessly adds a small extra weight. If the extra weight is small
enough, no difference will be perceived in the sensation. After a time,
another small extra weight may be added, and still no change will be
perceived; but if both extra weights had been added at once, it may be
that the change would be quite easily perceptible. Or, again, take
shades of colour. It would be easy to find three stuffs of such closely
similar shades that no difference could be perceived between the first
and second, nor yet between the second and third, while yet the first
and third would be distinguishable. In such a case, the second shade
cannot be the same as the first, or it would be distinguishable from the
third; nor the same as the third, or it would be distinguishable from
the first. It must, therefore, though indistinguishable from both, be
really intermediate between them.

  [21] "Le continu mathmatique," _Revue de Mtaphysique et de Morale_,
  vol. i. p. 29.

Such considerations as the above show that, although we cannot
distinguish sense-data unless they differ by more than a certain amount,
it is perfectly reasonable to suppose that sense-data of a given kind,
such as weights or colours, really form a compact series. The objections
which may be brought from a psychological point of view against the
mathematical theory of motion are not, therefore, objections to this
theory properly understood, but only to a quite unnecessary assumption
of simplicity in the momentary object of sense. Of the immediate object
of sense, in the case of a visible motion, we may say that at each
instant it is in all the positions which remain sensible at that
instant; but this set of positions changes continuously from moment to
moment, and is amenable to exactly the same mathematical treatment as if
it were a mere point. When we assert that some mathematical account of
phenomena is correct, all that we primarily assert is that _something_
definable in terms of the crude phenomena satisfies our formul; and in
this sense the mathematical theory of motion is applicable to the data
of sensation as well as to the supposed particles of abstract physics.

There are a number of distinct questions which are apt to be confused
when the mathematical continuum is said to be inadequate to the facts of
sense. We may state these, in order of diminishing generality, as
follows:--

    (a) Are series possessing mathematical continuity logically
    possible?

    (b) Assuming that they are possible logically, are they not
    impossible as applied to actual sense-data, because, among actual
    sense-data, there are no such fixed mutually external terms as are
    to be found, _e.g._, in the series of fractions?

    (c) Does not the assumption of points and instants make the whole
    mathematical account fictitious?

    (d) Finally, assuming that all these objections have been answered,
    is there, in actual empirical fact, any sufficient reason to believe
    the world of sense continuous?

Let us consider these questions in succession.

(a) The question of the logical possibility of the mathematical
continuum turns partly on the elementary misunderstandings we considered
at the beginning of the present lecture, partly on the possibility of
the mathematical infinite, which will occupy our next two lectures, and
partly on the logical form of the answer to the Bergsonian objection
which we stated a few minutes ago. I shall say no more on this topic at
present, since it is desirable first to complete the psychological
answer.

(b) The question whether sense-data are composed of mutually external
units is not one which can be decided by empirical evidence. It is often
urged that, as a matter of immediate experience, the sensible flux is
devoid of divisions, and is falsified by the dissections of the
intellect. Now I have no wish to argue that this view is _contrary_ to
immediate experience: I wish only to maintain that it is essentially
incapable of being _proved_ by immediate experience. As we saw, there
must be among sense-data differences so slight as to be imperceptible:
the fact that sense-data are immediately given does not mean that their
differences also _must_ be immediately given (though they _may_ be).
Suppose, for example, a coloured surface on which the colour changes
gradually--so gradually that the difference of colour in two very
neighbouring portions is imperceptible, while the difference between
more widely separated portions is quite noticeable. The effect produced,
in such a case, will be precisely that of "interpenetration," of
transition which is not a matter of discrete units. And since it tends
to be supposed that the colours, being immediate data, must _appear_
different if they _are_ different, it seems easily to follow that
"interpenetration" must be the ultimately right account. But this does
not follow. It is unconsciously assumed, as a premiss for a _reductio ad
absurdum_ of the analytic view, that, if A and B are immediate data, and
A differs from B, then the fact that they differ must also be an
immediate datum. It is difficult to say how this assumption arose, but I
think it is to be connected with the confusion between "acquaintance"
and "knowledge about." Acquaintance, which is what we derive from sense,
does not, theoretically at least, imply even the smallest "knowledge
about," _i.e._ it does not imply knowledge of any proposition concerning
the object with which we are acquainted. It is a mistake to speak as if
acquaintance had degrees: there is merely acquaintance and
non-acquaintance. When we speak of becoming "better acquainted," as for
instance with a person, what we must mean is, becoming acquainted with
more parts of a certain whole; but the acquaintance with each part is
either complete or nonexistent. Thus it is a mistake to say that if we
were perfectly acquainted with an object we should know all about it.
"Knowledge about" is knowledge of propositions, which is not involved
necessarily in acquaintance with the constituents of the propositions.
To know that two shades of colour are different is knowledge about them;
hence acquaintance with the two shades does not in any way necessitate
the knowledge that they are different.

From what has just been said it follows that the nature of sense-data
cannot be validly used to prove that they are not composed of mutually
external units. It may be admitted, on the other hand, that nothing in
their empirical character specially necessitates the view that they are
composed of mutually external units. This view, if it is held, must be
held on logical, not on empirical, grounds. I believe that the logical
grounds are adequate to the conclusion. They rest, at bottom, upon the
impossibility of explaining complexity without assuming constituents. It
is undeniable that the visual field, for example, is complex; and so far
as I can see, there is always self-contradiction in the theories which,
while admitting this complexity, attempt to deny that it results from a
combination of mutually external units. But to pursue this topic would
lead us too far from our theme, and I shall therefore say no more about
it at present.

(c) It is sometimes urged that the mathematical account of motion is
rendered fictitious by its assumption of points and instants. Now there
are here two different questions to be distinguished. There is the
question of absolute or relative space and time, and there is the
question whether what occupies space and time must be composed of
elements which have no extension or duration. And each of these
questions in turn may take two forms, namely: () is the hypothesis
_consistent_ with the facts and with logic? () is it _necessitated_ by
the facts or by logic? I wish to answer, in each case, yes to the first
form of the question, and no to the second. But in any case the
mathematical account of motion will not be fictitious, provided a right
interpretation is given to the words "point" and "instant." A few words
on each alternative will serve to make this clear.

Formally, mathematics adopts an absolute theory of space and time,
_i.e._ it assumes that, besides the things which are in space and time,
there are also entities, called "points" and "instants," which are
occupied by things. This view, however, though advocated by Newton, has
long been regarded by mathematicians as merely a convenient fiction.
There is, so far as I can see, no conceivable evidence either for or
against it. It is logically possible, and it is consistent with the
facts. But the facts are also consistent with the denial of spatial and
temporal entities over and above things with spatial and temporal
relations. Hence, in accordance with Occam's razor, we shall do well to
abstain from either assuming or denying points and instants. This means,
so far as practical working out is concerned, that we adopt the
relational theory; for in practice the refusal to assume points and
instants has the same effect as the denial of them. But in strict theory
the two are quite different, since the denial introduces an element of
unverifiable dogma which is wholly absent when we merely refrain from
the assertion. Thus, although we shall derive points and instants from
things, we shall leave the bare possibility open that they may also have
an independent existence as simple entities.

We come now to the question whether the things in space and time are to
be conceived as composed of elements without extension or duration,
_i.e._ of elements which only occupy a point and an instant. Physics,
formally, assumes in its differential equations that things consist of
elements which occupy only a point at each instant, but persist
throughout time. For reasons explained in Lecture IV., the persistence
of things through time is to be regarded as the formal result of a
logical construction, not as necessarily implying any actual
persistence. The same motives, in fact, which lead to the division of
things into point-particles, ought presumably to lead to their division
into instant-particles, so that the ultimate _formal_ constituent of the
matter in physics will be a point-instant-particle. But such objects, as
well as the particles of physics, are not data. The same economy of
hypothesis, which dictates the practical adoption of a relative rather
than an absolute space and time, also dictates the practical adoption of
material elements which have a finite extension and duration. Since, as
we saw in Lecture IV., points and instants can be constructed as logical
functions of such elements, the mathematical account of motion, in which
a particle passes continuously through a continuous series of points,
can be interpreted in a form which assumes only elements which agree
with our actual data in having a finite extension and duration. Thus, so
far as the use of points and instants is concerned, the mathematical
account of motion can be freed from the charge of employing fictions.

(d) But we must now face the question: Is there, in actual empirical
fact, any sufficient reason to believe the world of sense continuous?
The answer here must, I think, be in the negative. We may say that the
hypothesis of continuity is perfectly consistent with the facts and with
logic, and that it is technically simpler than any other tenable
hypothesis. But since our powers of discrimination among very similar
sensible objects are not infinitely precise, it is quite impossible to
decide between different theories which only differ in regard to what is
below the margin of discrimination. If, for example, a coloured surface
which we see consists of a finite number of very small surfaces, and if
a motion which we see consists, like a cinematograph, of a large finite
number of successive positions, there will be nothing empirically
discoverable to show that objects of sense are not continuous. In what
is called _experienced_ continuity, such as is said to be given in
sense, there is a large negative element: absence of perception of
difference occurs in cases which are _thought_ to give perception of
absence of difference. When, for example, we cannot distinguish a colour
A from a colour B, nor a colour B from a colour C, but can distinguish A
from C, the indistinguishability is a purely negative fact, namely, that
we do not _perceive_ a difference. Even in regard to immediate data,
this is no reason for denying that there is a difference. Thus, if we
see a coloured surface whose colour changes gradually, its sensible
appearance if the change is continuous will be indistinguishable from
what it would be if the change were by small finite jumps. If this is
true, as it seems to be, it follows that there can never be any
empirical evidence to demonstrate that the sensible world is continuous,
and not a collection of a very large finite number of elements of which
each differs from its neighbour in a finite though very small degree.
The continuity of space and time, the infinite number of different
shades in the spectrum, and so on, are all in the nature of unverifiable
hypotheses--perfectly possible logically, perfectly consistent with the
known facts, and simpler technically than any other tenable hypotheses,
but not the sole hypotheses which are logically and empirically
adequate.

If a relational theory of instants is constructed, in which an "instant"
is defined as a group of events simultaneous with each other and not all
simultaneous with any event outside the group, then if our resulting
series of instants is to be compact, it must be possible, if _x_ wholly
precedes _y_, to find an event _z_, simultaneous with part of _x_, which
wholly precedes some event which wholly precedes _y_. Now this requires
that the number of events concerned should be infinite in any finite
period of time. If this is to be the case in the world of one man's
sense-data, and if each sense-datum is to have not less than a certain
finite temporal extension, it will be necessary to assume that we always
have an infinite number of sense-data simultaneous with any given
sense-datum. Applying similar considerations to space, and assuming that
sense-data are to have not less than a certain spatial extension, it
will be necessary to suppose that an infinite number of sense-data
overlap spatially with any given sense-datum. This hypothesis is
possible, if we suppose a single sense-datum, _e.g._ in sight, to be a
finite surface, enclosing other surfaces which are also single
sense-data. But there are difficulties in such a hypothesis, and I do
not know whether these difficulties could be successfully met. If they
cannot, we must do one of two things: either declare that the world of
one man's sense-data is not continuous, or else refuse to admit that
there is any lower limit to the duration and extension of a single
sense-datum. I do not know what is the right course to adopt as regards
these alternatives. The logical analysis we have been considering
provides the apparatus for dealing with the various hypotheses, and the
empirical decision between them is a problem for the psychologist.

(3) We have now to consider the _logical_ answer to the alleged
difficulties of the mathematical theory of motion, or rather to the
positive theory which is urged on the other side. The view urged
explicitly by Bergson, and implied in the doctrines of many
philosophers, is, that a motion is something indivisible, not validly
analysable into a series of states. This is part of a much more general
doctrine, which holds that analysis always falsifies, because the parts
of a complex whole are different, as combined in that whole, from what
they would otherwise be. It is very difficult to state this doctrine in
any form which has a precise meaning. Often arguments are used which
have no bearing whatever upon the question. It is urged, for example,
that when a man becomes a father, his nature is altered by the new
relation in which he finds himself, so that he is not strictly identical
with the man who was previously not a father. This may be true, but it
is a causal psychological fact, not a logical fact. The doctrine would
require that a man who is a father cannot be strictly identical with a
man who is a son, because he is modified in one way by the relation of
fatherhood and in another by that of sonship. In fact, we may give a
precise statement of the doctrine we are combating in the form: _There
can never be two facts concerning the same thing._ A fact concerning a
thing always is or involves a relation to one or more entities; thus two
facts concerning the same thing would involve two relations of the same
thing. But the doctrine in question holds that a thing is so modified by
its relations that it cannot be the same in one relation as in another.
Hence, if this doctrine is true, there can never be more than one fact
concerning any one thing. I do not think the philosophers in question
have realised that this is the precise statement of the view they
advocate, because in this form the view is so contrary to plain truth
that its falsehood is evident as soon as it is stated. The discussion of
this question, however, involves so many logical subtleties, and is so
beset with difficulties, that I shall not pursue it further at present.

When once the above general doctrine is rejected, it is obvious that,
where there is change, there must be a succession of states. There
cannot be change--and motion is only a particular case of change--unless
there is something different at one time from what there is at some
other time. Change, therefore, must involve relations and complexity,
and must demand analysis. So long as our analysis has only gone as far
as other smaller changes, it is not complete; if it is to be complete,
it must end with terms that are not changes, but are related by a
relation of earlier and later. In the case of changes which appear
continuous, such as motions, it seems to be impossible to find anything
other than change so long as we deal with finite periods of time,
however short. We are thus driven back, by the logical necessities of
the case, to the conception of instants without duration, or at any rate
without any duration which even the most delicate instruments can
reveal. This conception, though it can be made to seem difficult, is
really easier than any other that the facts allow. It is a kind of
logical framework into which any tenable theory must fit--not
necessarily itself the statement of the crude facts, but a form in which
statements which are true of the crude facts can be made by a suitable
interpretation. The direct consideration of the crude facts of the
physical world has been undertaken in earlier lectures; in the present
lecture, we have only been concerned to show that nothing in the crude
facts is inconsistent with the mathematical doctrine of continuity, or
demands a continuity of a radically different kind from that of
mathematical motion.




LECTURE VI

THE PROBLEM OF INFINITY CONSIDERED HISTORICALLY


It will be remembered that, when we enumerated the grounds upon which
the reality of the sensible world has been questioned, one of those
mentioned was the supposed impossibility of infinity and continuity. In
view of our earlier discussion of physics, it would seem that no
_conclusive_ empirical evidence exists in favour of infinity or
continuity in objects of sense or in matter. Nevertheless, the
explanation which assumes infinity and continuity remains incomparably
easier and more natural, from a scientific point of view, than any
other, and since Georg Cantor has shown that the supposed contradictions
are illusory, there is no longer any reason to struggle after a finitist
explanation of the world.

The supposed difficulties of continuity all have their source in the
fact that a continuous series must have an infinite number of terms, and
are in fact difficulties concerning infinity. Hence, in freeing the
infinite from contradiction, we are at the same time showing the logical
possibility of continuity as assumed in science.

The kind of way in which infinity has been used to discredit the world
of sense may be illustrated by Kant's first two antinomies. In the
first, the thesis states: "The world has a beginning in time, and as
regards space is enclosed within limits"; the antithesis states: "The
world has no beginning and no limits in space, but is infinite in
respect of both time and space." Kant professes to prove both these
propositions, whereas, if what we have said on modern logic has any
truth, it must be impossible to prove either. In order, however, to
rescue the world of sense, it is enough to destroy the proof of _one_ of
the two. For our present purpose, it is the proof that the world is
_finite_ that interests us. Kant's argument as regards space here rests
upon his argument as regards time. We need therefore only examine the
argument as regards time. What he says is as follows:

"For let us assume that the world has no beginning as regards time, so
that up to every given instant an eternity has elapsed, and therefore an
infinite series of successive states of the things in the world has
passed by. But the infinity of a series consists just in this, that it
can never be completed by successive synthesis. Therefore an infinite
past world-series is impossible, and accordingly a beginning of the
world is a necessary condition of its existence; which was the first
thing to be proved."

Many different criticisms might be passed on this argument, but we will
content ourselves with a bare minimum. To begin with, it is a mistake to
define the infinity of a series as "impossibility of completion by
successive synthesis." The notion of infinity, as we shall see in the
next lecture, is primarily a property of _classes_, and only
derivatively applicable to series; classes which are infinite are given
all at once by the defining property of their members, so that there is
no question of "completion" or of "successive synthesis." And the word
"synthesis," by suggesting the mental activity of synthesising,
introduces, more or less surreptitiously, that reference to mind by
which all Kant's philosophy was infected. In the second place, when Kant
says that an infinite series can "never" be completed by successive
synthesis, all that he has even conceivably a right to say is that it
cannot be completed _in a finite time_. Thus what he really proves is,
at most, that if the world had no beginning, it must have already
existed for an infinite time. This, however, is a very poor conclusion,
by no means suitable for his purposes. And with this result we might, if
we chose, take leave of the first antinomy.

It is worth while, however, to consider how Kant came to make such an
elementary blunder. What happened in his imagination was obviously
something like this: Starting from the present and going backwards in
time, we have, if the world had no beginning, an infinite series of
events. As we see from the word "synthesis," he imagined a mind trying
to grasp these successively, _in the reverse order_ to that in which
they had occurred, _i.e._ going from the present backwards. _This_
series is obviously one which has no end. But the series of events up to
the present has an end, since it ends with the present. Owing to the
inveterate subjectivism of his mental habits, he failed to notice that
he had reversed the sense of the series by substituting backward
synthesis for forward happening, and thus he supposed that it was
necessary to identify the mental series, which had no end, with the
physical series, which had an end but no beginning. It was this mistake,
I think, which, operating unconsciously, led him to attribute validity
to a singularly flimsy piece of fallacious reasoning.

The second antinomy illustrates the dependence of the problem of
continuity upon that of infinity. The thesis states: "Every complex
substance in the world consists of simple parts, and there exists
everywhere nothing but the simple or what is composed of it." The
antithesis states: "No complex thing in the world consists of simple
parts, and everywhere in it there exists nothing simple." Here, as
before, the proofs of both thesis and antithesis are open to criticism,
but for the purpose of vindicating physics and the world of sense it is
enough to find a fallacy in _one_ of the proofs. We will choose for this
purpose the proof of the antithesis, which begins as follows:

"Assume that a complex thing (as substance) consists of simple parts.
Since all external relation, and therefore all composition out of
substances, is only possible in space, the space occupied by a complex
thing must consist of as many parts as the thing consists of. Now space
does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces."

The rest of his argument need not concern us, for the nerve of the proof
lies in the one statement: "Space does not consist of simple parts, but
of spaces." This is like Bergson's objection to "the absurd proposition
that motion is made up of immobilities." Kant does not tell us why he
holds that a space must consist of spaces rather than of simple parts.
Geometry regards space as made up of points, which are simple; and
although, as we have seen, this view is not scientifically or logically
_necessary_, it remains _prim facie_ possible, and its mere possibility
is enough to vitiate Kant's argument. For, if his proof of the thesis of
the antinomy were valid, and if the antithesis could only be avoided by
assuming points, then the antinomy itself would afford a conclusive
reason in favour of points. Why, then, did Kant think it impossible that
space should be composed of points?

I think two considerations probably influenced him. In the first place,
the essential thing about space is spatial order, and mere points, by
themselves, will not account for spatial order. It is obvious that his
argument assumes absolute space; but it is spatial _relations_ that are
alone important, and they cannot be reduced to points. This ground for
his view depends, therefore, upon his ignorance of the logical theory of
order and his oscillations between absolute and relative space. But
there is also another ground for his opinion, which is more relevant to
our present topic. This is the ground derived from infinite
divisibility. A space may be halved, and then halved again, and so on
_ad infinitum_, and at every stage of the process the parts are still
spaces, not points. In order to reach points by such a method, it would
be necessary to come to the end of an unending process, which is
impossible. But just as an infinite class can be given all at once by
its defining concept, though it cannot be reached by successive
enumeration, so an infinite set of points can be given all at once as
making up a line or area or volume, though they can never be reached by
the process of successive division. Thus the infinite divisibility of
space gives no ground for denying that space is composed of points. Kant
does not give his grounds for this denial, and we can therefore only
conjecture what they were. But the above two grounds, which we have seen
to be fallacious, seem sufficient to account for his opinion, and we may
therefore conclude that the antithesis of the second antinomy is
unproved.

The above illustration of Kant's antinomies has only been introduced in
order to show the relevance of the problem of infinity to the problem of
the reality of objects of sense. In the remainder of the present
lecture, I wish to state and explain the problem of infinity, to show
how it arose, and to show the irrelevance of all the solutions proposed
by philosophers. In the following lecture, I shall try to explain the
true solution, which has been discovered by the mathematicians, but
nevertheless belongs essentially to philosophy. The solution is
definitive, in the sense that it entirely satisfies and convinces all
who study it carefully. For over two thousand years the human intellect
was baffled by the problem; its many failures and its ultimate success
make this problem peculiarly apt for the illustration of method.

The problem appears to have first arisen in some such way as the
following.[22] Pythagoras and his followers, who were interested, like
Descartes, in the application of number to geometry, adopted in that
science more arithmetical methods than those with which Euclid has made
us familiar. They, or their contemporaries the atomists, believed,
apparently, that space is composed of indivisible points, while time is
composed of indivisible instants.[23] This belief would not, by itself,
have raised the difficulties which they encountered, but it was
presumably accompanied by another belief, that the number of points in
any finite area or of instants in any finite period must be finite. I do
not suppose that this latter belief was a conscious one, because
probably no other possibility had occurred to them. But the belief
nevertheless operated, and very soon brought them into conflict with
facts which they themselves discovered. Before explaining how this
occurred, however, it is necessary to say one word in explanation of the
phrase "finite number." The _exact_ explanation is a matter for our next
lecture; for the present, it must suffice to say that I mean 0 and 1 and
2 and 3 and so on, for ever--in other words, any number that can be
obtained by successively adding ones. This includes all the numbers that
can be expressed by means of our ordinary numerals, and since such
numbers can be made greater and greater, without ever reaching an
unsurpassable maximum, it is easy to suppose that there are no other
numbers. But this supposition, natural as it is, is mistaken.

  [22] In what concerns the early Greek philosophers, my knowledge is
  largely derived from Burnet's valuable work, _Early Greek Philosophy_
  (2nd ed., London, 1908). I have also been greatly assisted by Mr D. S.
  Robertson of Trinity College, who has supplied the deficiencies of my
  knowledge of Greek, and brought important references to my notice.

  [23] _Cf._ Aristotle, _Metaphysics_, M. 6, 1080b, 18 _sqq._, and
  1083b, 8 _sqq._

Whether the Pythagoreans themselves believed space and time to be
composed of indivisible points and instants is a debatable question.[24]
It would seem that the distinction between space and matter had not yet
been clearly made, and that therefore, when an atomistic view is
expressed, it is difficult to decide whether particles of matter or
points of space are intended. There is an interesting passage[25] in
Aristotle's _Physics_,[26] where he says:

"The Pythagoreans all maintained the existence of the void, and said
that it enters into the heaven itself from the boundless breath,
inasmuch as the heaven breathes in the void also; and the void
differentiates natures, as if it were a sort of separation of
consecutives, and as if it were their differentiation; and that this
also is what is first in numbers, for it is the void which
differentiates them."

  [24] There is some reason to think that the Pythagoreans distinguished
  between discrete and continuous quantity. G. J. Allman, in his _Greek
  Geometry from Thales to Euclid_, says (p. 23): "The Pythagoreans made
  a fourfold division of mathematical science, attributing one of its
  parts to the how many,  , and the other to the how much, 
  ; and they assigned to each of these parts a twofold division.
  For they said that discrete quantity, or the _how many_, either
  subsists by itself or must be considered with relation to some other;
  but that continued quantity, or the _how much_, is either stable or in
  motion. Hence they affirmed that arithmetic contemplates that discrete
  quantity which subsists by itself, but music that which is related to
  another; and that geometry considers continued quantity so far as it
  is immovable; but astronomy ( ) contemplates continued
  quantity so far as it is of a self-motive nature. (Proclus, ed.
  Friedlein, p. 35. As to the distinction between  ,
  continuous, and  , discrete quantity, see Iambl., _in Nicomachi
  Geraseni Arithmeticam introductionem_, ed. Tennulius, p. 148.)" _Cf._
  p. 48.

  [25] Referred to by Burnet, _op. cit._, p. 120.

  [26] iv., 6. 213b, 22; H. Ritter and L. Preller, _Historia Philosophi
  Grc_, 8th ed., Gotha, 1898, p. 75 (this work will be referred to in
  future as "R. P.").

This seems to imply that they regarded matter as consisting of atoms
with empty space in between. But if so, they must have thought space
could be studied by only paying attention to the atoms, for otherwise it
would be hard to account for their arithmetical methods in geometry, or
for their statement that "things are numbers."

The difficulty which beset the Pythagoreans in their attempts to apply
numbers arose through their discovery of incommensurables, and this, in
turn, arose as follows. Pythagoras, as we all learnt in youth,
discovered the proposition that the sum of the squares on the sides of a
right-angled triangle is equal to the square on the hypotenuse. It is
said that he sacrificed an ox when he discovered this theorem; if so,
the ox was the first martyr to science. But the theorem, though it has
remained his chief claim to immortality, was soon found to have a
consequence fatal to his whole philosophy. Consider the case of a
right-angled triangle whose two sides are equal, such a triangle as is
formed by two sides of a square and a diagonal. Here, in virtue of the
theorem, the square on the diagonal is double of the square on either of
the sides. But Pythagoras or his early followers easily proved that the
square of one whole number cannot be double of the square of
another.[27] Thus the length of the side and the length of the diagonal
are incommensurable; that is to say, however small a unit of length you
take, if it is contained an exact number of times in the side, it is not
contained any exact number of times in the diagonal, and _vice versa_.

  [27] The Pythagorean proof is roughly as follows. If possible, let the
  ratio of the diagonal to the side of a square be _m_/_n_, where _m_
  and _n_ are whole numbers having no common factor. Then we must have
  _m_2 = 2_n_2. Now the square of an odd number is odd, but _m_2, being
  equal to 2_n_2, is even. Hence _m_ must be even. But the square of an
  even number divides by 4, therefore _n_2, which is half of _m_2, must
  be even. Therefore _n_ must be even. But, since _m_ is even, and _m_
  and _n_ have no common factor, _n_ must be odd. Thus _n_ must be both
  odd and even, which is impossible; and therefore the diagonal and the
  side cannot have a rational ratio.

Now this fact might have been assimilated by some philosophies without
any great difficulty, but to the philosophy of Pythagoras it was
absolutely fatal. Pythagoras held that number is the constitutive
essence of all things, yet no two numbers could express the ratio of the
side of a square to the diagonal. It would seem probable that we may
expand his difficulty, without departing from his thought, by assuming
that he regarded the length of a line as determined by the number of
atoms contained in it--a line two inches long would contain twice as
many atoms as a line one inch long, and so on. But if this were the
truth, then there must be a definite numerical ratio between any two
finite lengths, because it was supposed that the number of atoms in
each, however large, must be finite. Here there was an insoluble
contradiction. The Pythagoreans, it is said, resolved to keep the
existence of incommensurables a profound secret, revealed only to a few
of the supreme heads of the sect; and one of their number, Hippasos of
Metapontion, is even said to have been shipwrecked at sea for impiously
disclosing the terrible discovery to their enemies. It must be
remembered that Pythagoras was the founder of a new religion as well as
the teacher of a new science: if the science came to be doubted, the
disciples might fall into sin, and perhaps even eat beans, which
according to Pythagoras is as bad as eating parents' bones.

The problem first raised by the discovery of incommensurables proved, as
time went on, to be one of the most severe and at the same time most
far-reaching problems that have confronted the human intellect in its
endeavour to understand the world. It showed at once that numerical
measurement of lengths, if it was to be made accurate, must require an
arithmetic more advanced and more difficult than any that the ancients
possessed. They therefore set to work to reconstruct geometry on a basis
which did not assume the universal possibility of numerical
measurement--a reconstruction which, as may be seen in Euclid, they
effected with extraordinary skill and with great logical acumen. The
moderns, under the influence of Cartesian geometry, have reasserted the
universal possibility of numerical measurement, extending arithmetic,
partly for that purpose, so as to include what are called "irrational"
numbers, which give the ratios of incommensurable lengths. But although
irrational numbers have long been used without a qualm, it is only in
quite recent years that logically satisfactory definitions of them have
been given. With these definitions, the first and most obvious form of
the difficulty which confronted the Pythagoreans has been solved; but
other forms of the difficulty remain to be considered, and it is these
that introduce us to the problem of infinity in its pure form.

We saw that, accepting the view that a length is composed of points, the
existence of incommensurables proves that every finite length must
contain an infinite number of points. In other words, if we were to take
away points one by one, we should never have taken away all the points,
however long we continued the process. The number of points, therefore,
cannot be _counted_, for counting is a process which enumerates things
one by one. The property of being unable to be counted is characteristic
of infinite collections, and is a source of many of their paradoxical
qualities. So paradoxical are these qualities that until our own day
they were thought to constitute logical contradictions. A long line of
philosophers, from Zeno[28] to M. Bergson, have based much of their
metaphysics upon the supposed impossibility of infinite collections.
Broadly speaking, the difficulties were stated by Zeno, and nothing
material was added until we reach Bolzano's _Paradoxien des
Unendlichen_, a little work written in 1847-8, and published
posthumously in 1851. Intervening attempts to deal with the problem are
futile and negligible. The definitive solution of the difficulties is
due, not to Bolzano, but to Georg Cantor, whose work on this subject
first appeared in 1882.

  [28] In regard to Zeno and the Pythagoreans, I have derived much
  valuable information and criticism from Mr P. E. B. Jourdain.

In order to understand Zeno, and to realise how little modern orthodox
metaphysics has added to the achievements of the Greeks, we must
consider for a moment his master Parmenides, in whose interest the
paradoxes were invented.[29] Parmenides expounded his views in a poem
divided into two parts, called "the way of truth" and "the way of
opinion"--like Mr Bradley's "Appearance" and "Reality," except that
Parmenides tells us first about reality and then about appearance. "The
way of opinion," in his philosophy, is, broadly speaking,
Pythagoreanism; it begins with a warning: "Here I shall close my
trustworthy speech and thought about the truth. Henceforward learn the
opinions of mortals, giving ear to the deceptive ordering of my words."
What has gone before has been revealed by a goddess, who tells him what
really _is_. Reality, she says, is uncreated, indestructible,
unchanging, indivisible; it is "immovable in the bonds of mighty chains,
without beginning and without end; since coming into being and passing
away have been driven afar, and true belief has cast them away." The
fundamental principle of his inquiry is stated in a sentence which would
not be out of place in Hegel:[30] "Thou canst not know what is not--that
is impossible--nor utter it; for it is the same thing that can be
thought and that can be." And again: "It needs must be that what can be
thought and spoken of is; for it is possible for it to be, and it is not
possible for what is nothing to be." The impossibility of change follows
from this principle; for what is past can be spoken of, and therefore,
by the principle, still is.

  [29] So Plato makes Zeno say in the _Parmenides_, apropos of his
  philosophy as a whole; and all internal and external evidence supports
  this view.

  [30] "With Parmenides," Hegel says, "philosophising proper began."
  _Werke_ (edition of 1840), vol. xiii. p. 274.

The great conception of a reality behind the passing illusions of sense,
a reality one, indivisible, and unchanging, was thus introduced into
Western philosophy by Parmenides, not, it would seem, for mystical or
religious reasons, but on the basis of a logical argument as to the
impossibility of not-being. All the great metaphysical systems--notably
those of Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel--are the outcome of this fundamental
idea. It is difficult to disentangle the truth and the error in this
view. The contention that time is unreal and that the world of sense is
illusory must, I think, be regarded as based upon fallacious reasoning.
Nevertheless, there is some sense--easier to feel than to state--in
which time is an unimportant and superficial characteristic of reality.
Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real as the present, and a
certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential to philosophic
thought. The importance of time is rather practical than theoretical,
rather in relation to our desires than in relation to truth. A truer
image of the world, I think, is obtained by picturing things as entering
into the stream of time from an eternal world outside, than from a view
which regards time as the devouring tyrant of all that is. Both in
thought and in feeling, to realise the unimportance of time is the gate
of wisdom. But unimportance is not unreality; and therefore what we
shall have to say about Zeno's arguments in support of Parmenides must
be mainly critical.

The relation of Zeno to Parmenides is explained by Plato[31] in the
dialogue in which Socrates, as a young man, learns logical acumen and
philosophic disinterestedness from their dialectic. I quote from
Jowett's translation:

"I see, Parmenides, said Socrates, that Zeno is your second self in his
writings too; he puts what you say in another way, and would fain
deceive us into believing that he is telling us what is new. For you, in
your poems, say All is one, and of this you adduce excellent proofs; and
he on the other hand says There is no Many; and on behalf of this he
offers overwhelming evidence. To deceive the world, as you have done, by
saying the same thing in different ways, one of you affirming the one,
and the other denying the many, is a strain of art beyond the reach of
most of us.

"Yes, Socrates, said Zeno. But although you are as keen as a Spartan
hound in pursuing the track, you do not quite apprehend the true motive
of the composition, which is not really such an ambitious work as you
imagine; for what you speak of was an accident; I had no serious
intention of deceiving the world. The truth is, that these writings of
mine were meant to protect the arguments of Parmenides against those who
scoff at him and show the many ridiculous and contradictory results
which they suppose to follow from the affirmation of the one. My answer
is an address to the partisans of the many, whose attack I return with
interest by retorting upon them that their hypothesis of the being of
the many if carried out appears in a still more ridiculous light than
the hypothesis of the being of the one."

  [31] _Parmenides_, 128 A-D.

Zeno's four arguments against motion were intended to exhibit the
contradictions that result from supposing that there is such a thing as
change, and thus to support the Parmenidean doctrine that reality is
unchanging.[32] Unfortunately, we only know his arguments through
Aristotle,[33] who stated them in order to refute them. Those
philosophers in the present day who have had their doctrines stated by
opponents will realise that a just or adequate presentation of Zeno's
position is hardly to be expected from Aristotle; but by some care in
interpretation it seems possible to reconstruct the so-called "sophisms"
which have been "refuted" by every tyro from that day to this.

  [32] This interpretation is combated by Milhaud, _Les
  philosophes-gomtres de la Grce_, p. 140 n., but his reasons do not
  seem to me convincing. All the interpretations in what follows are
  open to question, but all have the support of reputable authorities.

  [33] _Physics_, vi. 9. 2396 (R.P. 136-139).

Zeno's arguments would seem to be "ad hominem"; that is to say, they
seem to assume premisses granted by his opponents, and to show that,
granting these premisses, it is possible to deduce consequences which
his opponents must deny. In order to decide whether they are valid
arguments or "sophisms," it is necessary to guess at the tacit
premisses, and to decide who was the "homo" at whom they were aimed.
Some maintain that they were aimed at the Pythagoreans,[34] while others
have held that they were intended to refute the atomists.[35] M.
Evellin, on the contrary, holds that they constitute a refutation of
infinite divisibility,[36] while M. G. Nol, in the interests of Hegel,
maintains that the first two arguments refute infinite divisibility,
while the next two refute indivisibles.[37] Amid such a bewildering
variety of interpretations, we can at least not complain of any
restrictions on our liberty of choice.

  [34] _Cf._ Gaston Milhaud, _Les philosophes-gomtres de la Grce_,
  p. 140 n.; Paul Tannery, _Pour l'histoire de la science hellne_,
  p. 249; Burnet, _op. cit._, p. 362.

  [35] _Cf._ R. K. Gaye, "On Aristotle, _Physics_, Z ix." _Journal of
  Philology_, vol. xxxi., esp. p. 111. Also Moritz Cantor, _Vorlesungen
  ber Geschichte der Mathematik_, 1st ed., vol. i., 1880, p. 168, who,
  however, subsequently adopted Paul Tannery's opinion, _Vorlesungen_,
  3rd ed. (vol. i. p. 200).

  [36] "Le mouvement et les partisans des indivisibles," _Revue de
  Mtaphysique et de Morale_, vol. i. pp. 382-395.

  [37] "Le mouvement et les arguments de Znon d'le," _Revue de
  Mtaphysique et de Morale_, vol. i. pp. 107-125.

The historical questions raised by the above-mentioned discussions are
no doubt largely insoluble, owing to the very scanty material from which
our evidence is derived. The points which seem fairly clear are the
following: (1) That, in spite of MM. Milhaud and Paul Tannery, Zeno is
anxious to prove that motion is really impossible, and that he desires
to prove this because he follows Parmenides in denying plurality;[38]
(2) that the third and fourth arguments proceed on the hypothesis of
indivisibles, a hypothesis which, whether adopted by the Pythagoreans or
not, was certainly much advocated, as may be seen from the treatise _On
Indivisible Lines_ attributed to Aristotle. As regards the first two
arguments, they would seem to be valid on the hypothesis of
indivisibles, and also, without this hypothesis, to be such as would be
valid if the traditional contradictions in infinite numbers were
insoluble, which they are not.

  [38] _Cf._ M. Brochard, "Les prtendus sophismes de Znon d'le,"
  _Revue de Mtaphysique et de Morale_, vol. i. pp. 209-215.

We may conclude, therefore, that Zeno's polemic is directed against the
view that space and time consist of points and instants; and that as
against the view that a finite stretch of space or time consists of a
finite number of points and instants, his arguments are not sophisms,
but perfectly valid.

The conclusion which Zeno wishes us to draw is that plurality is a
delusion, and spaces and times are really indivisible. The other
conclusion which is possible, namely, that the number of points and
instants is infinite, was not tenable so long as the infinite was
infected with contradictions. In a fragment which is not one of the four
famous arguments against motion, Zeno says:

"If things are a many, they must be just as many as they are, and
neither more nor less. Now, if they are as many as they are, they will
be finite in number.

"If things are a many, they will be infinite in number; for there will
always be other things between them, and others again between these. And
so things are infinite in number."[39]

  [39] Simplicius, _Phys._, 140, 28 D (R.P. 133); Burnet, _op. cit._,
  pp. 364-365.

This argument attempts to prove that, if there are many things, the
number of them must be both finite and infinite, which is impossible;
hence we are to conclude that there is only one thing. But the weak
point in the argument is the phrase: "If they are just as many as they
are, they will be finite in number." This phrase is not very clear, but
it is plain that it assumes the impossibility of definite infinite
numbers. Without this assumption, which is now known to be false, the
arguments of Zeno, though they suffice (on certain very reasonable
assumptions) to dispel the hypothesis of finite indivisibles, do not
suffice to prove that motion and change and plurality are impossible.
They are not, however, on any view, mere foolish quibbles: they are
serious arguments, raising difficulties which it has taken two thousand
years to answer, and which even now are fatal to the teachings of most
philosophers.

The first of Zeno's arguments is the argument of the race-course, which
is paraphrased by Burnet as follows:[40]

"You cannot get to the end of a race-course. You cannot traverse an
infinite number of points in a finite time. You must traverse the half
of any given distance before you traverse the whole, and the half of
that again before you can traverse it. This goes on _ad infinitum_, so
that there are an infinite number of points in any given space, and you
cannot touch an infinite number one by one in a finite time."[41]

  [40] _Op. cit._, p. 367.

  [41] Aristotle's words are: "The first is the one on the non-existence
  of motion on the ground that what is moved must always attain the
  middle point sooner than the end-point, on which we gave our opinion
  in the earlier part of our discourse." _Phys._, vi. 9. 939B (R.P.
  136). Aristotle seems to refer to _Phys._, vi. 2. 223AB [R.P. 136A]:
  "All space is continuous, for time and space are divided into the same
  and equal divisions.... Wherefore also Zeno's argument is fallacious,
  that it is impossible to go through an infinite collection or to touch
  an infinite collection one by one in a finite time. For there are two
  senses in which the term 'infinite' is applied both to length and to
  time, and in fact to all continuous things, either in regard to
  divisibility, or in regard to the ends. Now it is not possible to
  touch things infinite in regard to number in a finite time, but it is
  possible to touch things infinite in regard to divisibility: for time
  itself also is infinite in this sense. So that in fact we go through
  an infinite, [space] in an infinite [time] and not in a finite [time],
  and we touch infinite things with infinite things, not with finite
  things." Philoponus, a sixth-century commentator (R.P. 136A, _Exc.
  Paris Philop. in Arist. Phys._, 803, 2. Vit.), gives the following
  illustration: "For if a thing were moved the space of a cubit in one
  hour, since in every space there are an infinite number of points, the
  thing moved must needs touch all the points of the space: it will then
  go through an infinite collection in a finite time, which is
  impossible."

Zeno appeals here, in the first place, to the fact that any distance,
however small, can be halved. From this it follows, of course, that
there must be an infinite number of points in a line. But, Aristotle
represents him as arguing, you cannot touch an infinite number of points
_one by one_ in a finite time. The words "one by one" are important. (1)
If _all_ the points touched are concerned, then, though you pass through
them continuously, you do not touch them "one by one." That is to say,
after touching one, there is not another which you touch next: no two
points are next each other, but between any two there are always an
infinite number of others, which cannot be enumerated one by one. (2)
If, on the other hand, only the successive middle points are concerned,
obtained by always halving what remains of the course, then the points
are reached one by one, and, though they are infinite in number, they
are in fact all reached in a finite time. His argument to the contrary
may be supposed to appeal to the view that a finite time must consist of
a finite number of instants, in which case what he says would be
perfectly true on the assumption that the possibility of continued
dichotomy is undeniable. If, on the other hand, we suppose the argument
directed against the partisans of infinite divisibility, we must suppose
it to proceed as follows:[42] "The points given by successive halving of
the distances still to be traversed are infinite in number, and are
reached in succession, each being reached a finite time later than its
predecessor; but the sum of an infinite number of finite times must be
infinite, and therefore the process will never be completed." It is very
possible that this is historically the right interpretation, but in this
form the argument is invalid. If half the course takes half a minute,
and the next quarter takes a quarter of a minute, and so on, the whole
course will take a minute. The apparent force of the argument, on this
interpretation, lies solely in the mistaken supposition that there
cannot be anything beyond the whole of an infinite series, which can be
seen to be false by observing that 1 is beyond the whole of the infinite
series 1/2, 3/4, 7/8, 15/16, ...

  [42] _Cf._ Mr C. D. Broad, "Note on Achilles and the Tortoise,"
  _Mind_, N.S., vol. xxii. pp. 318-9.

The second of Zeno's arguments is the one concerning Achilles and the
tortoise, which has achieved more notoriety than the others. It is
paraphrased by Burnet as follows:[43]

"Achilles will never overtake the tortoise. He must first reach the
place from which the tortoise started. By that time the tortoise will
have got some way ahead. Achilles must then make up that, and again the
tortoise will be ahead. He is always coming nearer, but he never makes
up to it."[44]

  [43] _Op. cit._

  [44] Aristotle's words are: "The second is the so-called Achilles. It
  consists in this, that the slower will never be overtaken in its
  course by the quickest, for the pursuer must always come first to the
  point from which the pursued has just departed, so that the slower
  must necessarily be always still more or less in advance." _Phys._,
  vi. 9. 239B (R.P. 137).

This argument is essentially the same as the previous one. It shows
that, if Achilles ever overtakes the tortoise, it must be after an
infinite number of instants have elapsed since he started. This is in
fact true; but the view that an infinite number of instants make up an
infinitely long time is not true, and therefore the conclusion that
Achilles will never overtake the tortoise does not follow.

The third argument,[45] that of the arrow, is very interesting. The text
has been questioned. Burnet accepts the alterations of Zeller, and
paraphrases thus:

"The arrow in flight is at rest. For, if everything is at rest when it
occupies a space equal to itself, and what is in flight at any given
moment always occupies a space equal to itself, it cannot move."

  [45] _Phys._, vi. 9. 239B (R.P. 138).

But according to Prantl, the literal translation of the unemended text
of Aristotle's statement of the argument is as follows: "If everything,
when it is behaving in a uniform manner, is continually either moving or
at rest, but what is moving is always in the _now_, then the moving
arrow is motionless." This form of the argument brings out its force
more clearly than Burnet's paraphrase.

Here, if not in the first two arguments, the view that a finite part of
time consists of a finite series of successive instants seems to be
assumed; at any rate the plausibility of the argument seems to depend
upon supposing that there are consecutive instants. Throughout an
instant, it is said, a moving body is where it is: it cannot move during
the instant, for that would require that the instant should have parts.
Thus, suppose we consider a period consisting of a thousand instants,
and suppose the arrow is in flight throughout this period. At each of
the thousand instants, the arrow is where it is, though at the next
instant it is somewhere else. It is never moving, but in some miraculous
way the change of position has to occur _between_ the instants, that is
to say, not at any time whatever. This is what M. Bergson calls the
cinematographic representation of reality. The more the difficulty is
meditated, the more real it becomes. The solution lies in the theory of
continuous series: we find it hard to avoid supposing that, when the
arrow is in flight, there is a _next_ position occupied at the _next_
moment; but in fact there is no next position and no next moment, and
when once this is imaginatively realised, the difficulty is seen to
disappear.

The fourth and last of Zeno's arguments is[46] the argument of the
stadium.

  [46] _Phys._, vi. 9. 239B (R.P. 139).

The argument as stated by Burnet is as follows:

  First Position.  Second Position.
      A ....           A  ....
      B ....           B ....
      C ....           C   ....

"Half the time may be equal to double the time. Let us suppose three
rows of bodies, one of which (A) is at rest while the other two (B, C)
are moving with equal velocity in opposite directions. By the time they
are all in the same part of the course, B will have passed twice as many
of the bodies in C as in A. Therefore the time which it takes to pass C
is twice as long as the time it takes to pass A. But the time which B
and C take to reach the position of A is the same. Therefore double the
time is equal to the half."

Gaye[47] devoted an interesting article to the interpretation of this
argument. His translation of Aristotle's statement is as follows:

"The fourth argument is that concerning the two rows of bodies, each row
being composed of an equal number of bodies of equal size, passing each
other on a race-course as they proceed with equal velocity in opposite
directions, the one row originally occupying the space between the goal
and the middle point of the course, and the other that between the
middle point and the starting-post. This, he thinks, involves the
conclusion that half a given time is equal to double the time. The
fallacy of the reasoning lies in the assumption that a body occupies an
equal time in passing with equal velocity a body that is in motion and a
body of equal size that is at rest, an assumption which is false. For
instance (so runs the argument), let A A ... be the stationary bodies of
equal size, B B ... the bodies, equal in number and in size to A A ...,
originally occupying the half of the course from the starting-post to
the middle of the A's, and C C ... those originally occupying the other
half from the goal to the middle of the A's, equal in number, size, and
velocity, to B B ... Then three consequences follow. First, as the B's
and C's pass one another, the first B reaches the last C at the same
moment at which the first C reaches the last B. Secondly, at this moment
the first C has passed all the A's, whereas the first B has passed only
half the A's and has consequently occupied only half the time occupied
by the first C, since each of the two occupies an equal time in passing
each A. Thirdly, at the same moment all the B's have passed all the C's:
for the first C and the first B will simultaneously reach the opposite
ends of the course, since (so says Zeno) the time occupied by the first
C in passing each of the B's is equal to that occupied by it in passing
each of the A's, because an equal time is occupied by both the first B
and the first C in passing all the A's. This is the argument: but it
presupposes the aforesaid fallacious assumption."

  [47] _Loc. cit._

  First Position.     Second Position.
  B  B B              B  B B
                         

  A  A A           A  A A
                      

  C  C C        C  C C
                   

This argument is not quite easy to follow, and it is only valid as
against the assumption that a finite time consists of a finite number of
instants. We may re-state it in different language. Let us suppose three
drill-sergeants, A, A, and A, standing in a row, while the two files
of soldiers march past them in opposite directions. At the first moment
which we consider, the three men B, B, B in one row, and the three men
C, C, C in the other row, are respectively opposite to A, A, and A.
At the very next moment, each row has moved on, and now B and C are
opposite A. Thus B and C are opposite each other. When, then, did B
pass C? It must have been somewhere between the two moments which we
supposed consecutive, and therefore the two moments cannot really have
been consecutive. It follows that there must be other moments between
any two given moments, and therefore that there must be an infinite
number of moments in any given interval of time.

The above difficulty, that B must have passed C at some time between
two consecutive moments, is a genuine one, but is not precisely the
difficulty raised by Zeno. What Zeno professes to prove is that "half of
a given time is equal to double that time." The most intelligible
explanation of the argument known to me is that of Gaye.[48] Since,
however, his explanation is not easy to set forth shortly, I will
re-state what seems to me to be the logical essence of Zeno's
contention. If we suppose that time consists of a series of consecutive
instants, and that motion consists in passing through a series of
consecutive points, then the fastest possible motion is one which, at
each instant, is at a point consecutive to that at which it was at the
previous instant. Any slower motion must be one which has intervals of
rest interspersed, and any faster motion must wholly omit some points.
All this is evident from the fact that we cannot have more than one
event for each instant. But now, in the case of our A's and B's and C's,
B is opposite a fresh A every instant, and therefore the number of A's
passed gives the number of instants since the beginning of the motion.
But during the motion B has passed twice as many C's, and yet cannot
have passed more than one each instant. Hence the number of instants
since the motion began is twice the number of A's passed, though we
previously found it was equal to this number. From this result, Zeno's
conclusion follows.

  [48] _Loc. cit._, p. 105.

Zeno's arguments, in some form, have afforded grounds for almost all the
theories of space and time and infinity which have been constructed from
his day to our own. We have seen that all his arguments are valid (with
certain reasonable hypotheses) on the assumption that finite spaces and
times consist of a finite number of points and instants, and that the
third and fourth almost certainly in fact proceeded on this assumption,
while the first and second, which were perhaps intended to refute the
opposite assumption, were in that case fallacious. We may therefore
escape from his paradoxes either by maintaining that, though space and
time do consist of points and instants, the number of them in any finite
interval is infinite; or by denying that space and time consist of
points and instants at all; or lastly, by denying the reality of space
and time altogether. It would seem that Zeno himself, as a supporter of
Parmenides, drew the last of these three possible deductions, at any
rate in regard to time. In this a very large number of philosophers have
followed him. Many others, like M. Bergson, have preferred to deny that
space and time consist of points and instants. Either of these solutions
will meet the difficulties in the form in which Zeno raised them. But,
as we saw, the difficulties can also be met if infinite numbers are
admissible. And on grounds which are independent of space and time,
infinite numbers, and series in which no two terms are consecutive, must
in any case be admitted. Consider, for example, all the fractions less
than 1, arranged in order of magnitude. Between any two of them, there
are others, for example, the arithmetical mean of the two. Thus no two
fractions are consecutive, and the total number of them is infinite. It
will be found that much of what Zeno says as regards the series of
points on a line can be equally well applied to the series of fractions.
And we cannot deny that there are fractions, so that two of the above
ways of escape are closed to us. It follows that, if we are to solve the
whole class of difficulties derivable from Zeno's by analogy, we must
discover some tenable theory of infinite numbers. What, then, are the
difficulties which, until the last thirty years, led philosophers to the
belief that infinite numbers are impossible?

The difficulties of infinity are of two kinds, of which the first may be
called sham, while the others involve, for their solution, a certain
amount of new and not altogether easy thinking. The sham difficulties
are those suggested by the etymology, and those suggested by confusion
of the mathematical infinite with what philosophers impertinently call
the "true" infinite. Etymologically, "infinite" should mean "having no
end." But in fact some infinite series have ends, some have not; while
some collections are infinite without being serial, and can therefore
not properly be regarded as either endless or having ends. The series of
instants from any earlier one to any later one (both included) is
infinite, but has two ends; the series of instants from the beginning of
time to the present moment has one end, but is infinite. Kant, in his
first antinomy, seems to hold that it is harder for the past to be
infinite than for the future to be so, on the ground that the past is
now completed, and that nothing infinite can be completed. It is very
difficult to see how he can have imagined that there was any sense in
this remark; but it seems most probable that he was thinking of the
infinite as the "unended." It is odd that he did not see that the future
too has one end at the present, and is precisely on a level with the
past. His regarding the two as different in this respect illustrates
just that kind of slavery to time which, as we agreed in speaking of
Parmenides, the true philosopher must learn to leave behind him.

The confusions introduced into the notions of philosophers by the
so-called "true" infinite are curious. They see that this notion is not
the same as the mathematical infinite, but they choose to believe that
it is the notion which the mathematicians are vainly trying to reach.
They therefore inform the mathematicians, kindly but firmly, that they
are mistaken in adhering to the "false" infinite, since plainly the
"true" infinite is something quite different. The reply to this is that
what they call the "true" infinite is a notion totally irrelevant to the
problem of the mathematical infinite, to which it has only a fanciful
and verbal analogy. So remote is it that I do not propose to confuse the
issue by even mentioning what the "true" infinite is. It is the "false"
infinite that concerns us, and we have to show that the epithet "false"
is undeserved.

There are, however, certain genuine difficulties in understanding the
infinite, certain habits of mind derived from the consideration of
finite numbers, and easily extended to infinite numbers under the
mistaken notion that they represent logical necessities. For example,
every number that we are accustomed to, except 0, has another number
immediately before it, from which it results by adding 1; but the first
infinite number does not have this property. The numbers before it form
an infinite series, containing all the ordinary finite numbers, having
no maximum, no last finite number, after which one little step would
plunge us into the infinite. If it is assumed that the first infinite
number is reached by a succession of small steps, it is easy to show
that it is self-contradictory. The first infinite number is, in fact,
beyond the whole unending series of finite numbers. "But," it will be
said, "there cannot be anything beyond the whole of an unending series."
This, we may point out, is the very principle upon which Zeno relies in
the arguments of the race-course and the Achilles. Take the race-course:
there is the moment when the runner still has half his distance to run,
then the moment when he still has a quarter, then when he still has an
eighth, and so on in a strictly unending series. Beyond the whole of
this series is the moment when he reaches the goal. Thus there certainly
can be something beyond the whole of an unending series. But it remains
to show that this fact is only what might have been expected.

The difficulty, like most of the vaguer difficulties besetting the
mathematical infinite, is derived, I think, from the more or less
unconscious operation of the idea of _counting_. If you set to work to
count the terms in an infinite collection, you will never have completed
your task. Thus, in the case of the runner, if half, three-quarters,
seven-eighths, and so on of the course were marked, and the runner was
not allowed to pass any of the marks until the umpire said "Now," then
Zeno's conclusion would be true in practice, and he would never reach
the goal.

But it is not essential to the existence of a collection, or even to
knowledge and reasoning concerning it, that we should be able to pass
its terms in review one by one. This may be seen in the case of finite
collections; we can speak of "mankind" or "the human race," though many
of the individuals in this collection are not personally known to us. We
can do this because we know of various characteristics which every
individual has if he belongs to the collection, and not if he does not.
And exactly the same happens in the case of infinite collections: they
may be known by their characteristics although their terms cannot be
enumerated. In this sense, an unending series may nevertheless form a
whole, and there may be new terms beyond the whole of it.

Some purely arithmetical peculiarities of infinite numbers have also
caused perplexity. For instance, an infinite number is not increased by
adding one to it, or by doubling it. Such peculiarities have seemed to
many to contradict logic, but in fact they only contradict confirmed
mental habits. The whole difficulty of the subject lies in the necessity
of thinking in an unfamiliar way, and in realising that many properties
which we have thought inherent in number are in fact peculiar to finite
numbers. If this is remembered, the positive theory of infinity, which
will occupy the next lecture, will not be found so difficult as it is to
those who cling obstinately to the prejudices instilled by the
arithmetic which is learnt in childhood.




LECTURE VII

THE POSITIVE THEORY OF INFINITY


The positive theory of infinity, and the general theory of number to
which it has given rise, are among the triumphs of scientific method in
philosophy, and are therefore specially suitable for illustrating the
logical-analytic character of that method. The work in this subject has
been done by mathematicians, and its results can be expressed in
mathematical symbolism. Why, then, it may be said, should the subject be
regarded as philosophy rather than as mathematics? This raises a
difficult question, partly concerned with the use of words, but partly
also of real importance in understanding the function of philosophy.
Every subject-matter, it would seem, can give rise to philosophical
investigations as well as to the appropriate science, the difference
between the two treatments being in the direction of movement and in the
kind of truths which it is sought to establish. In the special sciences,
when they have become fully developed, the movement is forward and
synthetic, from the simpler to the more complex. But in philosophy we
follow the inverse direction: from the complex and relatively concrete
we proceed towards the simple and abstract by means of analysis,
seeking, in the process, to eliminate the particularity of the original
subject-matter, and to confine our attention entirely to the logical
_form_ of the facts concerned.

Between philosophy and pure mathematics there is a certain affinity, in
the fact that both are general and _a priori_. Neither of them asserts
propositions which, like those of history and geography, depend upon the
actual concrete facts being just what they are. We may illustrate this
characteristic by means of Leibniz's conception of many _possible_
worlds, of which one only is _actual_. In all the many possible worlds,
philosophy and mathematics will be the same; the differences will only
be in respect of those particular facts which are chronicled by the
descriptive sciences. Any quality, therefore, by which our actual world
is distinguished from other abstractly possible worlds, must be ignored
by mathematics and philosophy alike. Mathematics and philosophy differ,
however, in their manner of treating the general properties in which all
possible worlds agree; for while mathematics, starting from
comparatively simple propositions, seeks to build up more and more
complex results by deductive synthesis, philosophy, starting from data
which are common knowledge, seeks to purify and generalise them into the
simplest statements of abstract form that can be obtained from them by
logical analysis.

The difference between philosophy and mathematics may be illustrated by
our present problem, namely, the nature of number. Both start from
certain facts about numbers which are evident to inspection. But
mathematics uses these facts to deduce more and more complicated
theorems, while philosophy seeks, by analysis, to go behind these facts
to others, simpler, more fundamental, and inherently more fitted to form
the premisses of the science of arithmetic. The question, "What is a
number?" is the pre-eminent philosophic question in this subject, but it
is one which the mathematician as such need not ask, provided he knows
enough of the properties of numbers to enable him to deduce his
theorems. We, since our object is philosophical, must grapple with the
philosopher's question. The answer to the question, "What is a number?"
which we shall reach in this lecture, will be found to give also, by
implication, the answer to the difficulties of infinity which we
considered in the previous lecture.

The question "What is a number?" is one which, until quite recent times,
was never considered in the kind of way that is capable of yielding a
precise answer. Philosophers were content with some vague dictum such
as, "Number is unity in plurality." A typical definition of the kind
that contented philosophers is the following from Sigwart's _Logic_
( 66, section 3): "Every number is not merely a _plurality_, but a
plurality thought _as held together and closed, and to that extent as a
unity_." Now there is in such definitions a very elementary blunder, of
the same kind that would be committed if we said "yellow is a flower"
because some flowers are yellow. Take, for example, the number 3. A
single collection of three things might conceivably be described as "a
plurality thought as held together and closed, and to that extent as a
unity"; but a collection of three things is not the number 3. The number
3 is something which all collections of three things have in common, but
is not itself a collection of three things. The definition, therefore,
apart from any other defects, has failed to reach the necessary degree
of abstraction: the number 3 is something more abstract than any
collection of three things.

Such vague philosophic definitions, however, remained inoperative
because of their very vagueness. What most men who thought about numbers
really had in mind was that numbers are the result of _counting_. "On
the consciousness of the law of counting," says Sigwart at the beginning
of his discussion of number, "rests the possibility of spontaneously
prolonging the series of numbers _ad infinitum_." It is this view of
number as generated by counting which has been the chief psychological
obstacle to the understanding of infinite numbers. Counting, because it
is familiar, is erroneously supposed to be simple, whereas it is in fact
a highly complex process, which has no meaning unless the numbers
reached in counting have some significance independent of the process by
which they are reached. And infinite numbers cannot be reached at all in
this way. The mistake is of the same kind as if cows were defined as
what can be bought from a cattle-merchant. To a person who knew several
cattle-merchants, but had never seen a cow, this might seem an admirable
definition. But if in his travels he came across a herd of wild cows, he
would have to declare that they were not cows at all, because no
cattle-merchant could sell them. So infinite numbers were declared not
to be numbers at all, because they could not be reached by counting.

It will be worth while to consider for a moment what counting actually
is. We count a set of objects when we let our attention pass from one to
another, until we have attended once to each, saying the names of the
numbers in order with each successive act of attention. The last number
named in this process is the number of the objects, and therefore
counting is a method of finding out what the number of the objects is.
But this operation is really a very complicated one, and those who
imagine that it is the logical source of number show themselves
remarkably incapable of analysis. In the first place, when we say "one,
two, three ..." as we count, we cannot be said to be discovering the
number of the objects counted unless we attach some meaning to the words
one, two, three, ... A child may learn to know these words in order, and
to repeat them correctly like the letters of the alphabet, without
attaching any meaning to them. Such a child may count correctly from the
point of view of a grown-up listener, without having any idea of numbers
at all. The operation of counting, in fact, can only be intelligently
performed by a person who already has some idea what the numbers are;
and from this it follows that counting does not give the logical basis
of number.

Again, how do we know that the last number reached in the process of
counting is the number of the objects counted? This is just one of those
facts that are too familiar for their significance to be realised; but
those who wish to be logicians must acquire the habit of dwelling upon
such facts. There are two propositions involved in this fact: first,
that the number of numbers from 1 up to any given number is that given
number--for instance, the number of numbers from 1 to 100 is a hundred;
secondly, that if a set of numbers can be used as names of a set of
objects, each number occurring only once, then the number of numbers
used as names is the same as the number of objects. The first of these
propositions is capable of an easy arithmetical proof so long as finite
numbers are concerned; but with infinite numbers, after the first, it
ceases to be true. The second proposition remains true, and is in fact,
as we shall see, an immediate consequence of the definition of number.
But owing to the falsehood of the first proposition where infinite
numbers are concerned, counting, even if it were practically possible,
would not be a valid method of discovering the number of terms in an
infinite collection, and would in fact give different results according
to the manner in which it was carried out.

There are two respects in which the infinite numbers that are known
differ from finite numbers: first, infinite numbers have, while finite
numbers have not, a property which I shall call _reflexiveness_;
secondly, finite numbers have, while infinite numbers have not, a
property which I shall call _inductiveness_. Let us consider these two
properties successively.

(1) _Reflexiveness._--A number is said to be _reflexive_ when it is not
increased by adding 1 to it. It follows at once that any finite number
can be added to a reflexive number without increasing it. This property
of infinite numbers was always thought, until recently, to be
self-contradictory; but through the work of Georg Cantor it has come to
be recognised that, though at first astonishing, it is no more
self-contradictory than the fact that people at the antipodes do not
tumble off. In virtue of this property, given any infinite collection of
objects, any finite number of objects can be added or taken away without
increasing or diminishing the number of the collection. Even an infinite
number of objects may, under certain conditions, be added or taken away
without altering the number. This may be made clearer by the help of
some examples.

Imagine all the natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, ... to be written down in a
row, and immediately beneath them write down the numbers 1, 2, 3,
4, ..., so that 1 is under 0, 2 is under 1, and so on. Then every number
in the top row has a number directly under it in the bottom row, and no
number occurs twice in either row. It follows that the number of numbers
in the two rows must be the same. But all the numbers that occur in the
bottom row also occur in the top row, and one more, namely 0; thus the
number of terms in the top row is obtained by adding one to the number
of the bottom row. So long, therefore, as it was supposed that a number
must be increased by adding 1 to it, this state of things constituted a
contradiction, and led to the denial that there are infinite numbers.

  0, 1, 2, 3, ... _n_ ...
  1, 2, 3, 4, ... _n_ + 1 ...

The following example is even more surprising. Write the natural numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, ... in the top row, and the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, ... in
the bottom row, so that under each number in the top row stands its
double in the bottom row. Then, as before, the number of numbers in the
two rows is the same, yet the second row results from taking away all
the odd numbers--an infinite collection--from the top row. This example
is given by Leibniz to prove that there can be no infinite numbers. He
believed in infinite collections, but, since he thought that a number
must always be increased when it is added to and diminished when it is
subtracted from, he maintained that infinite collections do not have
numbers. "The number of all numbers," he says, "implies a contradiction,
which I show thus: To any number there is a corresponding number equal
to its double. Therefore the number of all numbers is not greater than
the number of even numbers, _i.e._ the whole is not greater than its
part."[49] In dealing with this argument, we ought to substitute "the
number of all finite numbers" for "the number of all numbers"; we then
obtain exactly the illustration given by our two rows, one containing
all the finite numbers, the other only the even finite numbers. It will
be seen that Leibniz regards it as self-contradictory to maintain that
the whole is not greater than its part. But the word "greater" is one
which is capable of many meanings; for our purpose, we must substitute
the less ambiguous phrase "containing a greater number of terms." In
this sense, it is not self-contradictory for whole and part to be equal;
it is the realisation of this fact which has made the modern theory of
infinity possible.

  [49] _Phil. Werke_, Gerhardt's edition, vol. i. p. 338.

There is an interesting discussion of the reflexiveness of infinite
wholes in the first of Galileo's Dialogues on Motion. I quote from a
translation published in 1730.[50] The personages in the dialogue are
Salviati, Sagredo, and Simplicius, and they reason as follows:

"_Simp._ Here already arises a Doubt which I think is not to be
resolv'd; and that is this: Since 'tis plain that one Line is given
greater than another, and since both contain infinite Points, we must
surely necessarily infer, that we have found in the same Species
something greater than Infinite, since the Infinity of Points of the
greater Line exceeds the Infinity of Points of the lesser. But now, to
assign an Infinite greater than an Infinite, is what I can't possibly
conceive.

"_Salv._ These are some of those Difficulties which arise from
Discourses which our finite Understanding makes about Infinites, by
ascribing to them Attributes which we give to Things finite and
terminate, which I think most improper, because those Attributes of
Majority, Minority, and Equality, agree not with Infinities, of which we
can't say that one is greater than, less than, or equal to another. For
Proof whereof I have something come into my Head, which (that I may be
the better understood) I will propose by way of Interrogatories to
_Simplicius_, who started this Difficulty. To begin then: I suppose you
know which are square Numbers, and which not?

"_Simp._ I know very well that a square Number is that which arises from
the Multiplication of any Number into itself; thus 4 and 9 are square
Numbers, that arising from 2, and this from 3, multiplied by themselves.

"_Salv._ Very well; And you also know, that as the Products are call'd
Squares, the Factors are call'd Roots: And that the other Numbers, which
proceed not from Numbers multiplied into themselves, are not Squares.
Whence taking in all Numbers, both Squares and Not Squares, if I should
say, that the Not Squares are more than the Squares, should I not be in
the right?

"_Simp._ Most certainly.

"_Salv._ If I go on with you then, and ask you, How many squar'd Numbers
there are? you may truly answer, That there are as many as are their
proper Roots, since every Square has its own Root, and every Root its
own Square, and since no Square has more than one Root, nor any Root
more than one Square.

"_Simp._ Very true.

"_Salv._ But now, if I should ask how many Roots there are, you can't
deny but there are as many as there are Numbers, since there's no Number
but what's the Root to some Square. And this being granted, we may
likewise affirm, that there are as many square Numbers, as there are
Numbers; for there are as many Squares as there are Roots, and as many
Roots as Numbers. And yet in the Beginning of this, we said, there were
many more Numbers than Squares, the greater Part of Numbers being not
Squares: And tho' the Number of Squares decreases in a greater
proportion, as we go on to bigger Numbers, for count to an Hundred
you'll find 10 Squares, viz. 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, which
is the same as to say the 10th Part are Squares; in Ten thousand only
the 100th Part are Squares; in a Million only the 1000th: And yet in an
infinite Number, if we can but comprehend it, we may say the Squares are
as many as all the Numbers taken together.

"_Sagr._ What must be determin'd then in this Case?

"_Salv._ I see no other way, but by saying that all Numbers are
infinite; Squares are Infinite, their Roots Infinite, and that the
Number of Squares is not less than the Number of Numbers, nor this less
than that: and then by concluding that the Attributes or Terms of
Equality, Majority, and Minority, have no Place in Infinites, but are
confin'd to terminate Quantities."

  [50] _Mathematical Discourses concerning two new sciences relating to
  mechanics and local motion, in four dialogues._ By Galileo Galilei,
  Chief Philosopher and Mathematician to the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Done
  into English from the Italian, by Tho. Weston, late Master, and now
  published by John Weston, present Master, of the Academy at Greenwich.
  See pp. 46 ff.

The way in which the problem is expounded in the above discussion is
worthy of Galileo, but the solution suggested is not the right one. It
is actually the case that the number of square (finite) numbers is the
same as the number of (finite) numbers. The fact that, so long as we
confine ourselves to numbers less than some given finite number, the
proportion of squares tends towards zero as the given finite number
increases, does not contradict the fact that the number of all finite
squares is the same as the number of all finite numbers. This is only an
instance of the fact, now familiar to mathematicians, that the _limit_
of a function as the variable _approaches_ a given point may not be the
same as its _value_ when the variable actually _reaches_ the given
point. But although the infinite numbers which Galileo discusses are
equal, Cantor has shown that what Simplicius could not conceive is true,
namely, that there are an infinite number of different infinite numbers,
and that the conception of _greater_ and _less_ can be perfectly well
applied to them. The whole of Simplicius's difficulty comes, as is
evident, from his belief that, if _greater_ and _less_ can be applied, a
part of an infinite collection must have fewer terms than the whole; and
when this is denied, all contradictions disappear. As regards greater
and less lengths of lines, which is the problem from which the above
discussion starts, that involves a meaning of _greater_ and _less_ which
is not arithmetical. The number of points is the same in a long line and
in a short one, being in fact the same as the number of points in all
space. The _greater_ and _less_ of metrical geometry involves the new
metrical conception of _congruence_, which cannot be developed out of
arithmetical considerations alone. But this question has not the
fundamental importance which belongs to the arithmetical theory of
infinity.

(2) _Non-inductiveness._--The second property by which infinite numbers
are distinguished from finite numbers is the property of
non-inductiveness. This will be best explained by defining the positive
property of inductiveness which characterises the finite numbers, and
which is named after the method of proof known as "mathematical
induction."

Let us first consider what is meant by calling a property "hereditary"
in a given series. Take such a property as being named Jones. If a man
is named Jones, so is his son; we will therefore call the property of
being called Jones hereditary with respect to the relation of father and
son. If a man is called Jones, all his descendants in the direct male
line are called Jones; this follows from the fact that the property is
hereditary. Now, instead of the relation of father and son, consider the
relation of a finite number to its immediate successor, that is, the
relation which holds between 0 and 1, between 1 and 2, between 2 and 3,
and so on. If a property of numbers is hereditary with respect to this
relation, then if it belongs to (say) 100, it must belong also to all
finite numbers greater than 100; for, being hereditary, it belongs to
101 because it belongs to 100, and it belongs to 102 because it belongs
to 101, and so on--where the "and so on" will take us, sooner or later,
to any finite number greater than 100. Thus, for example, the property
of being greater than 99 is hereditary in the series of finite numbers;
and generally, a property is hereditary in this series when, given any
number that possesses the property, the next number must always also
possess it.

It will be seen that a hereditary property, though it must belong to all
the finite numbers greater than a given number possessing the property,
need not belong to all the numbers less than this number. For example,
the hereditary property of being greater than 99 belongs to 100 and all
greater numbers, but not to any smaller number. Similarly, the
hereditary property of being called Jones belongs to all the descendants
(in the direct male line) of those who have this property, but not to
all their ancestors, because we reach at last a first Jones, before whom
the ancestors have no surname. It is obvious, however, that any
hereditary property possessed by Adam must belong to all men; and
similarly any hereditary property possessed by 0 must belong to all
finite numbers. This is the principle of what is called "mathematical
induction." It frequently happens, when we wish to prove that all finite
numbers have some property, that we have first to prove that 0 has the
property, and then that the property is hereditary, _i.e._ that, if it
belongs to a given number, then it belongs to the next number. Owing to
the fact that such proofs are called "inductive," I shall call the
properties to which they are applicable "inductive" properties. Thus an
inductive property of numbers is one which is hereditary and belongs to
0.

Taking any one of the natural numbers, say 29, it is easy to see that it
must have all inductive properties. For since such properties belong to
0 and are hereditary, they belong to 1; therefore, since they are
hereditary, they belong to 2, and so on; by twenty-nine repetitions of
such arguments we show that they belong to 29. We may _define_ the
"inductive" numbers as _all those that possess all inductive
properties_; they will be the same as what are called the "natural"
numbers, _i.e._ the ordinary finite whole numbers. To all such numbers,
proofs by mathematical induction can be validly applied. They are those
numbers, we may loosely say, which can be reached from 0 by successive
additions of 1; in other words, they are all the numbers that can be
reached by counting.

But beyond all these numbers, there are the infinite numbers, and
infinite numbers do not have all inductive properties. Such numbers,
therefore, may be called non-inductive. All those properties of numbers
which are proved by an imaginary step-by-step process from one number to
the next are liable to fail when we come to infinite numbers. The first
of the infinite numbers has no immediate predecessor, because there is
no greatest finite number; thus no succession of steps from one number
to the next will ever reach from a finite number to an infinite one, and
the step-by-step method of proof fails. This is another reason for the
supposed self-contradictions of infinite numbers. Many of the most
familiar properties of numbers, which custom had led people to regard as
logically necessary, are in fact only demonstrable by the step-by-step
method, and fail to be true of infinite numbers. But so soon as we
realise the necessity of proving such properties by mathematical
induction, and the strictly limited scope of this method of proof, the
supposed contradictions are seen to contradict, not logic, but only our
prejudices and mental habits.

The property of being increased by the addition of 1--_i.e._ the
property of non-reflexiveness--may serve to illustrate the limitations
of mathematical induction. It is easy to prove that 0 is increased by
the addition of 1, and that, if a given number is increased by the
addition of 1, so is the next number, _i.e._ the number obtained by the
addition of 1. It follows that each of the natural numbers is increased
by the addition of 1. This follows generally from the general argument,
and follows for each particular case by a sufficient number of
applications of the argument. We first prove that 0 is not equal to 1;
then, since the property of being increased by 1 is hereditary, it
follows that 1 is not equal to 2; hence it follows that 2 is not equal
to 3; if we wish to prove that 30,000 is not equal to 30,001, we can do
so by repeating this reasoning 30,000 times. But we cannot prove in this
way that _all_ numbers are increased by the addition of 1; we can only
prove that this holds of the numbers attainable by successive additions
of 1 starting from 0. The reflexive numbers, which lie beyond all those
attainable in this way, are as a matter of fact not increased by the
addition of 1.

The two properties of reflexiveness and non-inductiveness, which we have
considered as characteristics of infinite numbers, have not so far been
proved to be always found together. It is known that all reflexive
numbers are non-inductive, but it is not known that all non-inductive
numbers are reflexive. Fallacious proofs of this proposition have been
published by many writers, including myself, but up to the present no
valid proof has been discovered. The infinite numbers actually known,
however, are all reflexive as well as non-inductive; thus, in
mathematical practice, if not in theory, the two properties are always
associated. For our purposes, therefore, it will be convenient to ignore
the bare possibility that there may be non-inductive non-reflexive
numbers, since all known numbers are either inductive or reflexive.

When infinite numbers are first introduced to people, they are apt to
refuse the name of numbers to them, because their behaviour is so
different from that of finite numbers that it seems a wilful misuse of
terms to call them numbers at all. In order to meet this feeling, we
must now turn to the logical basis of arithmetic, and consider the
logical definition of numbers.

The logical definition of numbers, though it seems an essential support
to the theory of infinite numbers, was in fact discovered independently
and by a different man. The theory of infinite numbers--that is to say,
the arithmetical as opposed to the logical part of the theory--was
discovered by Georg Cantor, and published by him in 1882-3.[51] The
definition of number was discovered about the same time by a man whose
great genius has not received the recognition it deserves--I mean
Gottlob Frege of Jena. His first work, _Begriffsschrift_, published in
1879, contained the very important theory of hereditary properties in a
series to which I alluded in connection with inductiveness. His
definition of number is contained in his second work, published in 1884,
and entitled _Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik, eine logisch-mathematische
Untersuchung ber den Begriff der Zahl_.[52] It is with this book that
the logical theory of arithmetic begins, and it will repay us to
consider Frege's analysis in some detail.

  [51] In his _Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannichfaltigkeitslehre_ and
  in articles in _Acta Mathematica_, vol. ii.

  [52] The definition of number contained in this book, and elaborated
  in the _Grundgesetze der Arithmetik_ (vol. i., 1893; vol. ii., 1903),
  was rediscovered by me in ignorance of Frege's work. I wish to state
  as emphatically as possible--what seems still often ignored--that his
  discovery antedated mine by eighteen years.

Frege begins by noting the increased desire for logical strictness in
mathematical demonstrations which distinguishes modern mathematicians
from their predecessors, and points out that this must lead to a
critical investigation of the definition of number. He proceeds to show
the inadequacy of previous philosophical theories, especially of the
"synthetic _a priori_" theory of Kant and the empirical theory of Mill.
This brings him to the question: What kind of object is it that number
can properly be ascribed to? He points out that physical things may be
regarded as one or many: for example, if a tree has a thousand leaves,
they may be taken altogether as constituting its foliage, which would
count as one, not as a thousand; and _one_ pair of boots is the same
object as _two_ boots. It follows that physical things are not the
subjects of which number is properly predicated; for when we have
discovered the proper subjects, the number to be ascribed must be
unambiguous. This leads to a discussion of the very prevalent view that
number is really something psychological and subjective, a view which
Frege emphatically rejects. "Number," he says, "is as little an object
of psychology or an outcome of psychical processes as the North Sea....
The botanist wishes to state something which is just as much a fact when
he gives the number of petals in a flower as when he gives its colour.
The one depends as little as the other upon our caprice. There is
therefore a certain similarity between number and colour; but this does
not consist in the fact that both are sensibly perceptible in external
things, but in the fact that both are objective" (p. 34).

"I distinguish the objective," he continues, "from the palpable, the
spatial, the actual. The earth's axis, the centre of mass of the solar
system, are objective, but I should not call them actual, like the earth
itself" (p. 35). He concludes that number is neither spatial and
physical, nor subjective, but non-sensible and objective. This
conclusion is important, since it applies to all the subject-matter of
mathematics and logic. Most philosophers have thought that the physical
and the mental between them exhausted the world of being. Some have
argued that the objects of mathematics were obviously not subjective,
and therefore must be physical and empirical; others have argued that
they were obviously not physical, and therefore must be subjective and
mental. Both sides were right in what they denied, and wrong in what
they asserted; Frege has the merit of accepting both denials, and
finding a third assertion by recognising the world of logic, which is
neither mental nor physical.

The fact is, as Frege points out, that no number, not even 1, is
applicable to physical things, but only to general terms or
descriptions, such as "man," "satellite of the earth," "satellite of
Venus." The general term "man" is applicable to a certain number of
objects: there are in the world so and so many men. The unity which
philosophers rightly feel to be necessary for the assertion of a number
is the unity of the general term, and it is the general term which is
the proper subject of number. And this applies equally when there is one
object or none which falls under the general term. "Satellite of the
earth" is a term only applicable to one object, namely, the moon. But
"one" is not a property of the moon itself, which may equally well be
regarded as many molecules: it is a property of the general term
"earth's satellite." Similarly, 0 is a property of the general term
"satellite of Venus," because Venus has no satellite. Here at last we
have an intelligible theory of the number 0. This was impossible if
numbers applied to physical objects, because obviously no physical
object could have the number 0. Thus, in seeking our definition of
number we have arrived so far at the result that numbers are properties
of general terms or general descriptions, not of physical things or of
mental occurrences.

Instead of speaking of a general term, such as "man," as the subject of
which a number can be asserted, we may, without making any serious
change, take the subject as the class or collection of objects--_i.e._
"mankind" in the above instance--to which the general term in question
is applicable. Two general terms, such as "man" and "featherless biped,"
which are applicable to the same collection of objects, will obviously
have the same number of instances; thus the number depends upon the
class, not upon the selection of this or that general term to describe
it, provided several general terms can be found to describe the same
class. But some general term is always necessary in order to describe a
class. Even when the terms are enumerated, as "this and that and the
other," the collection is constituted by the general property of being
either this, or that, or the other, and only so acquires the unity which
enables us to speak of it as _one_ collection. And in the case of an
infinite class, enumeration is impossible, so that description by a
general characteristic common and peculiar to the members of the class
is the only possible description. Here, as we see, the theory of number
to which Frege was led by purely logical considerations becomes of use
in showing how infinite classes can be amenable to number in spite of
being incapable of enumeration.

Frege next asks the question: When do two collections have the same
number of terms? In ordinary life, we decide this question by counting;
but counting, as we saw, is impossible in the case of infinite
collections, and is not logically fundamental with finite collections.
We want, therefore, a different method of answering our question. An
illustration may help to make the method clear. I do not know how many
married men there are in England, but I do know that the number is the
same as the number of married women. The reason I know this is that the
relation of husband and wife relates one man to one woman and one woman
to one man. A relation of this sort is called a one-one relation. The
relation of father to son is called a one-many relation, because a man
can have only one father but may have many sons; conversely, the
relation of son to father is called a many-one relation. But the
relation of husband to wife (in Christian countries) is called one-one,
because a man cannot have more than one wife, or a woman more than one
husband. Now, whenever there is a one-one relation between all the terms
of one collection and all the terms of another severally, as in the case
of English husbands and English wives, the number of terms in the one
collection is the same as the number in the other; but when there is not
such a relation, the number is different. This is the answer to the
question: When do two collections have the same number of terms?

We can now at last answer the question: What is meant by the number of
terms in a given collection? When there is a one-one relation between
all the terms of one collection and all the terms of another severally,
we shall say that the two collections are "similar." We have just seen
that two similar collections have the same number of terms. This leads
us to define the number of a given collection as the class of all
collections that are similar to it; that is to say, we set up the
following formal definition:

"The number of terms in a given class" is defined as meaning "the class
of all classes that are similar to the given class."

This definition, as Frege (expressing it in slightly different terms)
showed, yields the usual arithmetical properties of numbers. It is
applicable equally to finite and infinite numbers, and it does not
require the admission of some new and mysterious set of metaphysical
entities. It shows that it is not physical objects, but classes or the
general terms by which they are defined, of which numbers can be
asserted; and it applies to 0 and 1 without any of the difficulties
which other theories find in dealing with these two special cases.

The above definition is sure to produce, at first sight, a feeling of
oddity, which is liable to cause a certain dissatisfaction. It defines
the number 2, for instance, as the class of all couples, and the number
3 as the class of all triads. This does not _seem_ to be what we have
hitherto been meaning when we spoke of 2 and 3, though it would be
difficult to say _what_ we had been meaning. The answer to a feeling
cannot be a logical argument, but nevertheless the answer in this case
is not without importance. In the first place, it will be found that
when an idea which has grown familiar as an unanalysed whole is first
resolved accurately into its component parts--which is what we do when
we define it--there is almost always a feeling of unfamiliarity produced
by the analysis, which tends to cause a protest against the definition.
In the second place, it may be admitted that the definition, like all
definitions, is to a certain extent arbitrary. In the case of the small
finite numbers, such as 2 and 3, it would be possible to frame
definitions more nearly in accordance with our unanalysed feeling of
what we mean; but the method of such definitions would lack uniformity,
and would be found to fail sooner or later--at latest when we reached
infinite numbers.

In the third place, the real desideratum about such a definition as that
of number is not that it should represent as nearly as possible the
ideas of those who have not gone through the analysis required in order
to reach a definition, but that it should give us objects having the
requisite properties. Numbers, in fact, must satisfy the formul of
arithmetic; any indubitable set of objects fulfilling this requirement
may be called numbers. So far, the simplest set known to fulfil this
requirement is the set introduced by the above definition. In comparison
with this merit, the question whether the objects to which the
definition applies are like or unlike the vague ideas of numbers
entertained by those who cannot give a definition, is one of very little
importance. All the important requirements are fulfilled by the above
definition, and the sense of oddity which is at first unavoidable will
be found to wear off very quickly with the growth of familiarity.

There is, however, a certain logical doctrine which may be thought to
form an objection to the above definition of numbers as classes of
classes--I mean the doctrine that there are no such objects as classes
at all. It might be thought that this doctrine would make havoc of a
theory which reduces numbers to classes, and of the many other theories
in which we have made use of classes. This, however, would be a mistake:
none of these theories are any the worse for the doctrine that classes
are fictions. What the doctrine is, and why it is not destructive, I
will try briefly to explain.

On account of certain rather complicated difficulties, culminating in
definite contradictions, I was led to the view that nothing that can be
said significantly about things, _i.e._ particulars, can be said
significantly (_i.e._ either truly or falsely) about classes of things.
That is to say, if, in any sentence in which a thing is mentioned, you
substitute a class for the thing, you no longer have a sentence that has
any meaning: the sentence is no longer either true or false, but a
meaningless collection of words. Appearances to the contrary can be
dispelled by a moment's reflection. For example, in the sentence, "Adam
is fond of apples," you may substitute _mankind_, and say, "Mankind is
fond of apples." But obviously you do not mean that there is one
individual, called "mankind," which munches apples: you mean that the
separate individuals who compose mankind are each severally fond of
apples.

Now, if nothing that can be said significantly about a thing can be said
significantly about a class of things, it follows that classes of things
cannot have the same kind of reality as things have; for if they had, a
class could be substituted for a thing in a proposition predicating the
kind of reality which would be common to both. This view is really
consonant to common sense. In the third or fourth century B.C. there
lived a Chinese philosopher named Hui Tz, who maintained that "a bay
horse and a dun cow are three; because taken separately they are two,
and taken together they are one: two and one make three."[53] The author
from whom I quote says that Hui Tz "was particularly fond of the
quibbles which so delighted the sophists or unsound reasoners of ancient
Greece," and this no doubt represents the judgment of common sense upon
such arguments. Yet if collections of things were things, his contention
would be irrefragable. It is only because the bay horse and the dun cow
taken together are not a new thing that we can escape the conclusion
that there are three things wherever there are two.

  [53] Giles, _The Civilisation of China_ (Home University Library),
  p. 147.

When it is admitted that classes are not things, the question arises:
What do we mean by statements which are nominally about classes? Take
such a statement as, "The class of people interested in mathematical
logic is not very numerous." Obviously this reduces itself to, "Not very
many people are interested in mathematical logic." For the sake of
definiteness, let us substitute some particular number, say 3, for "very
many." Then our statement is, "Not three people are interested in
mathematical logic." This may be expressed in the form: "If _x_ is
interested in mathematical logic, and also _y_ is interested, and also
_z_ is interested, then _x_ is identical with _y_, or _x_ is identical
with _z_, or _y_ is identical with _z_." Here there is no longer any
reference at all to a "class." In some such way, all statements
nominally about a class can be reduced to statements about what follows
from the hypothesis of anything's having the defining property of the
class. All that is wanted, therefore, in order to render the _verbal_
use of classes legitimate, is a uniform method of interpreting
propositions in which such a use occurs, so as to obtain propositions in
which there is no longer any such use. The definition of such a method
is a technical matter, which Dr Whitehead and I have dealt with
elsewhere, and which we need not enter into on this occasion.[54]

  [54] Cf. _Principia Mathematica_,  20, and Introduction, chapter iii.

If the theory that classes are merely symbolic is accepted, it follows
that numbers are not actual entities, but that propositions in which
numbers verbally occur have not really any constituents corresponding to
numbers, but only a certain logical form which is not a part of
propositions having this form. This is in fact the case with all the
apparent objects of logic and mathematics. Such words as _or_, _not_,
_if_, _there is_, _identity_, _greater_, _plus_, _nothing_,
_everything_, _function_, and so on, are not names of definite objects,
like "John" or "Jones," but are words which require a context in order
to have meaning. All of them are _formal_, that is to say, their
occurrence indicates a certain form of proposition, not a certain
constituent. "Logical constants," in short, are not entities; the words
expressing them are not names, and cannot significantly be made into
logical subjects except when it is the words themselves, as opposed to
their meanings, that are being discussed.[55] This fact has a very
important bearing on all logic and philosophy, since it shows how they
differ from the special sciences. But the questions raised are so large
and so difficult that it is impossible to pursue them further on this
occasion.

  [55] In the above remarks I am making use of unpublished work by my
  friend Ludwig Wittgenstein.




LECTURE VIII

ON THE NOTION OF CAUSE, WITH APPLICATIONS TO THE FREE-WILL PROBLEM


The nature of philosophic analysis, as illustrated in our previous
lectures, can now be stated in general terms. We start from a body of
common knowledge, which constitutes our data. On examination, the data
are found to be complex, rather vague, and largely interdependent
logically. By analysis we reduce them to propositions which are as
nearly as possible simple and precise, and we arrange them in deductive
chains, in which a certain number of initial propositions form a logical
guarantee for all the rest. These initial propositions are _premisses_
for the body of knowledge in question. Premisses are thus quite
different from data--they are simpler, more precise, and less infected
with logical redundancy. If the work of analysis has been performed
completely, they will be wholly free from logical redundancy, wholly
precise, and as simple as is logically compatible with their leading to
the given body of knowledge. The discovery of these premisses belongs to
philosophy; but the work of deducing the body of common knowledge from
them belongs to mathematics, if "mathematics" is interpreted in a
somewhat liberal sense.

But besides the logical analysis of the common knowledge which forms our
data, there is the consideration of its degree of certainty. When we
have arrived at its premisses, we may find that some of them seem open
to doubt, and we may find further that this doubt extends to those of
our original data which depend upon these doubtful premisses. In our
third lecture, for example, we saw that the part of physics which
depends upon testimony, and thus upon the existence of other minds than
our own, does not seem so certain as the part which depends exclusively
upon our own sense-data and the laws of logic. Similarly, it used to be
felt that the parts of geometry which depend upon the axiom of parallels
have less certainty than the parts which are independent of this
premiss. We may say, generally, that what commonly passes as knowledge
is not all equally certain, and that, when analysis into premisses has
been effected, the degree of certainty of any consequence of the
premisses will depend upon that of the most doubtful premiss employed in
proving this consequence. Thus analysis into premisses serves not only a
logical purpose, but also the purpose of facilitating an estimate as to
the degree of certainty to be attached to this or that derivative
belief. In view of the fallibility of all human beliefs, this service
seems at least as important as the purely logical services rendered by
philosophical analysis.

In the present lecture, I wish to apply the analytic method to the
notion of "cause," and to illustrate the discussion by applying it to
the problem of free will. For this purpose I shall inquire: I., what is
meant by a causal law; II., what is the evidence that causal laws have
held hitherto; III., what is the evidence that they will continue to
hold in the future; IV., how the causality which is used in science
differs from that of common sense and traditional philosophy; V., what
new light is thrown on the question of free will by our analysis of the
notion of "cause."

I. By a "causal law" I mean any general proposition in virtue of which
it is possible to infer the existence of one thing or event from the
existence of another or of a number of others. If you hear thunder
without having seen lightning, you infer that there nevertheless was a
flash, because of the general proposition, "All thunder is preceded by
lightning." When Robinson Crusoe sees a footprint, he infers a human
being, and he might justify his inference by the general proposition,
"All marks in the ground shaped like a human foot are subsequent to a
human being's standing where the marks are." When we see the sun set, we
expect that it will rise again the next day. When we hear a man
speaking, we infer that he has certain thoughts. All these inferences
are due to causal laws.

A causal law, we said, allows us to infer the existence of one _thing_
(or _event_) from the existence of one or more others. The word "thing"
here is to be understood as only applying to particulars, _i.e._ as
excluding such logical objects as numbers or classes or abstract
properties and relations, and including sense-data, with whatever is
logically of the same type as sense-data.[56] In so far as a causal law
is directly verifiable, the thing inferred and the thing from which it
is inferred must both be data, though they need not both be data at the
same time. In fact, a causal law which is being used to extend our
knowledge of existence must be applied to what, at the moment, is not a
datum; it is in the possibility of such application that the practical
utility of a causal law consists. The important point, for our present
purpose, however, is that what is inferred is a "thing," a "particular,"
an object having the kind of reality that belongs to objects of sense,
not an abstract object such as virtue or the square root of two.

  [56] Thus we are not using "thing" here in the sense of a class of
  correlated "aspects," as we did in Lecture III. Each "aspect" will
  count separately in stating causal laws.

But we cannot become acquainted with a particular except by its being
actually given. Hence the particular inferred by a causal law must be
only _described_ with more or less exactness; it cannot be _named_ until
the inference is verified. Moreover, since the causal law is _general_,
and capable of applying to many cases, the given particular from which
we infer must allow the inference in virtue of some general
characteristic, not in virtue of its being just the particular that it
is. This is obvious in all our previous instances: we infer the
unperceived lightning from the thunder, not in virtue of any peculiarity
of the thunder, but in virtue of its resemblance to other claps of
thunder. Thus a causal law must state that the existence of a thing of a
certain sort (or of a number of things of a number of assigned sorts)
implies the existence of another thing having a relation to the first
which remains invariable so long as the first is of the kind in
question.

It is to be observed that what is constant in a causal law is not the
object or objects given, nor yet the object inferred, both of which may
vary within wide limits, but the _relation_ between what is given and
what is inferred. The principle, "same cause, same effect," which is
sometimes said to be the principle of causality, is much narrower in its
scope than the principle which really occurs in science; indeed, if
strictly interpreted, it has no scope at all, since the "same" cause
never recurs exactly. We shall return to this point at a later stage of
the discussion.

The particular which is inferred may be uniquely determined by the
causal law, or may be only described in such general terms that many
different particulars might satisfy the description. This depends upon
whether the constant relation affirmed by the causal law is one which
only one term can have to the data, or one which many terms may have. If
many terms may have the relation in question, science will not be
satisfied until it has found some more stringent law, which will enable
us to determine the inferred things uniquely.

Since all known things are in time, a causal law must take account of
temporal relations. It will be part of the causal law to state a
relation of succession or coexistence between the thing given and the
thing inferred. When we hear thunder and infer that there was lightning,
the law states that the thing inferred is earlier than the thing given.
Conversely, when we see lightning and wait expectantly for the thunder,
the law states that the thing given is earlier than the thing inferred.
When we infer a man's thoughts from his words, the law states that the
two are (at least approximately) simultaneous.

If a causal law is to achieve the precision at which science aims, it
must not be content with a vague _earlier_ or _later_, but must state
how much earlier or how much later. That is to say, the time-relation
between the thing given and the thing inferred ought to be capable of
exact statement; and usually the inference to be drawn is different
according to the length and direction of the interval. "A quarter of an
hour ago this man was alive; an hour hence he will be cold." Such a
statement involves two causal laws, one inferring from a datum something
which existed a quarter of an hour ago, the other inferring from the
same datum something which will exist an hour hence.

Often a causal law involves not one datum, but many, which need not be
all simultaneous with each other, though their time-relations must be
given. The general scheme of a causal law will be as follows:

"Whenever things occur in certain relations to each other (among which
their time-relations must be included), then a thing having a fixed
relation to these things will occur at a date fixed relatively to their
dates."

The things given will not, in practice, be things that only exist for an
instant, for such things, if there are any, can never be data. The
things given will each occupy some finite time. They may be not static
things, but processes, especially motions. We have considered in an
earlier lecture the sense in which a motion may be a datum, and need not
now recur to this topic.

It is not essential to a causal law that the object inferred should be
later than some or all of the data. It may equally well be earlier or at
the same time. The only thing essential is that the law should be such
as to enable us to infer the existence of an object which we can more or
less accurately describe in terms of the data.

II. I come now to our second question, namely: What is the nature of the
evidence that causal laws have held hitherto, at least in the observed
portions of the past? This question must not be confused with the
further question: Does this evidence warrant us in assuming the truth of
causal laws in the future and in unobserved portions of the past? For
the present, I am only asking what are the grounds which lead to a
belief in causal laws, not whether these grounds are adequate to support
the belief in universal causation.

The first step is the discovery of approximate unanalysed uniformities
of sequence or coexistence. After lightning comes thunder, after a blow
received comes pain, after approaching a fire comes warmth; again, there
are uniformities of coexistence, for example between touch and sight,
between certain sensations in the throat and the sound of one's own
voice, and so on. Every such uniformity of sequence or coexistence,
after it has been experienced a certain number of times, is followed by
an expectation that it will be repeated on future occasions, _i.e._ that
where one of the correlated events is found, the other will be found
also. The connection of experienced past uniformity with expectation as
to the future is just one of those uniformities of sequence which we
have observed to be true hitherto. This affords a psychological account
of what may be called the animal belief in causation, because it is
something which can be observed in horses and dogs, and is rather a
habit of acting than a real belief. So far, we have merely repeated
Hume, who carried the discussion of cause up to this point, but did not,
apparently, perceive how much remained to be said.

Is there, in fact, any characteristic, such as might be called causality
or uniformity, which is found to hold throughout the observed past? And
if so, how is it to be stated?

The particular uniformities which we mentioned before, such as lightning
being followed by thunder, are not found to be free from exceptions. We
sometimes see lightning without hearing thunder; and although, in such a
case, we suppose that thunder might have been heard if we had been
nearer to the lightning, that is a supposition based on theory, and
therefore incapable of being invoked to support the theory. What does
seem, however, to be shown by scientific experience is this: that where
an observed uniformity fails, some wider uniformity can be found,
embracing more circumstances, and subsuming both the successes and the
failures of the previous uniformity. Unsupported bodies in air fall,
unless they are balloons or aeroplanes; but the principles of mechanics
give uniformities which apply to balloons and aeroplanes just as
accurately as to bodies that fall. There is much that is hypothetical
and more or less artificial in the uniformities affirmed by mechanics,
because, when they cannot otherwise be made applicable, unobserved
bodies are inferred in order to account for observed peculiarities.
Still, it is an empirical fact that it is possible to preserve the laws
by assuming such bodies, and that they never have to be assumed in
circumstances in which they ought to be observable. Thus the empirical
verification of mechanical laws may be admitted, although we must also
admit that it is less complete and triumphant than is sometimes
supposed.

Assuming now, what must be admitted to be doubtful, that the whole of
the past has proceeded according to invariable laws, what can we say as
to the nature of these laws? They will not be of the simple type which
asserts that the same cause always produces the same effect. We may take
the law of gravitation as a sample of the kind of law that appears to be
verified without exception. In order to state this law in a form which
observation can confirm, we will confine it to the solar system. It then
states that the motions of planets and their satellites have at every
instant an acceleration compounded of accelerations towards all the
other bodies in the solar system, proportional to the masses of those
bodies and inversely proportional to the squares of their distances. In
virtue of this law, given the state of the solar system throughout any
finite time, however short, its state at all earlier and later times is
determinate except in so far as other forces than gravitation or other
bodies than those in the solar system have to be taken into
consideration. But other forces, so far as science can discover, appear
to be equally regular, and equally capable of being summed up in single
causal laws. If the mechanical account of matter were complete, the
whole physical history of the universe, past and future, could be
inferred from a sufficient number of data concerning an assigned finite
time, however short.

In the mental world, the evidence for the universality of causal laws is
less complete than in the physical world. Psychology cannot boast of any
triumph comparable to gravitational astronomy. Nevertheless, the
evidence is not very greatly less than in the physical world. The crude
and approximate causal laws from which science starts are just as easy
to discover in the mental sphere as in the physical. In the world of
sense, there are to begin with the correlations of sight and touch and
so on, and the facts which lead us to connect various kinds of
sensations with eyes, ears, nose, tongue, etc. Then there are such facts
as that our body moves in answer to our volitions. Exceptions exist, but
are capable of being explained as easily as the exceptions to the rule
that unsupported bodies in air fall. There is, in fact, just such a
degree of evidence for causal laws in psychology as will warrant the
psychologist in assuming them as a matter of course, though not such a
degree as will suffice to remove all doubt from the mind of a sceptical
inquirer. It should be observed that causal laws in which the given term
is mental and the inferred term physical, or _vice versa_, are at least
as easy to discover as causal laws in which both terms are mental.

It will be noticed that, although we have spoken of causal laws, we have
not hitherto introduced the word "cause." At this stage, it will be well
to say a few words on legitimate and illegitimate uses of this word. The
word "cause," in the scientific account of the world, belongs only to
the early stages, in which small preliminary, approximate
generalisations are being ascertained with a view to subsequent larger
and more invariable laws. We may say, "Arsenic causes death," so long as
we are ignorant of the precise process by which the result is brought
about. But in a sufficiently advanced science, the word "cause" will not
occur in any statement of invariable laws. There is, however, a somewhat
rough and loose use of the word "cause" which may be preserved. The
approximate uniformities which lead to its pre-scientific employment may
turn out to be true in all but very rare and exceptional circumstances,
perhaps in all circumstances that actually occur. In such cases, it is
convenient to be able to speak of the antecedent event as the "cause"
and the subsequent event as the "effect." In this sense, provided it is
realised that the sequence is not necessary and may have exceptions, it
is still possible to employ the words "cause" and "effect." It is in
this sense, and in this sense only, that we shall intend the words when
we speak of one particular event "causing" another particular event, as
we must sometimes do if we are to avoid intolerable circumlocution.

III. We come now to our third question, namely: What reason can be given
for believing that causal laws will hold in future, or that they have
held in unobserved portions of the past?

What we have said so far is that there have been hitherto certain
observed causal laws, and that all the empirical evidence we possess is
compatible with the view that everything, both mental and physical, so
far as our observation has extended, has happened in accordance with
causal laws. The law of universal causation, suggested by these facts,
may be enunciated as follows:

"There are such invariable relations between different events at the
same or different times that, given the state of the whole universe
throughout any finite time, however short, every previous and subsequent
event can theoretically be determined as a function of the given events
during that time."

Have we any reason to believe this universal law? Or, to ask a more
modest question, have we any reason to believe that a particular causal
law, such as the law of gravitation, will continue to hold in the
future?

Among observed causal laws is this, that observation of uniformities is
followed by expectation of their recurrence. A horse who has been driven
always along a certain road expects to be driven along that road again;
a dog who is always fed at a certain hour expects food at that hour and
not at any other. Such expectations, as Hume pointed out, explain only
too well the common-sense belief in uniformities of sequence, but they
afford absolutely no logical ground for beliefs as to the future, not
even for the belief that we shall continue to expect the continuation of
experienced uniformities, for that is precisely one of those causal laws
for which a ground has to be sought. If Hume's account of causation is
the last word, we have not only no reason to suppose that the sun will
rise to-morrow, but no reason to suppose that five minutes hence we
shall still expect it to rise to-morrow.

It may, of course, be said that all inferences as to the future are in
fact invalid, and I do not see how such a view could be disproved. But,
while admitting the legitimacy of such a view, we may nevertheless
inquire: If inferences as to the future _are_ valid, what principle must
be involved in making them?

The principle involved is the principle of induction, which, if it is
true, must be an _a priori_ logical law, not capable of being proved or
disproved by experience. It is a difficult question how this principle
ought to be formulated; but if it is to warrant the inferences which we
wish to make by its means, it must lead to the following proposition:
"If, in a great number of instances, a thing of a certain kind is
associated in a certain way with a thing of a certain other kind, it is
probable that a thing of the one kind is always similarly associated
with a thing of the other kind; and as the number of instances
increases, the probability approaches indefinitely near to certainty."
It may well be questioned whether this proposition is true; but if we
admit it, we can infer that any characteristic of the whole of the
observed past is likely to apply to the future and to the unobserved
past. This proposition, therefore, if it is true, will warrant the
inference that causal laws probably hold at all times, future as well as
past; but without this principle, the observed cases of the truth of
causal laws afford no presumption as to the unobserved cases, and
therefore the existence of a thing not directly observed can never be
validly inferred.

It is thus the principle of induction, rather than the law of causality,
which is at the bottom of all inferences as to the existence of things
not immediately given. With the principle of induction, all that is
wanted for such inferences can be proved; without it, all such
inferences are invalid. This principle has not received the attention
which its great importance deserves. Those who were interested in
deductive logic naturally enough ignored it, while those who emphasised
the scope of induction wished to maintain that all logic is empirical,
and therefore could not be expected to realise that induction itself,
their own darling, required a logical principle which obviously could
not be proved inductively, and must therefore be _a priori_ if it could
be known at all.

The view that the law of causality itself is _a priori_ cannot, I think,
be maintained by anyone who realises what a complicated principle it is.
In the form which states that "every event has a cause" it looks simple;
but on examination, "cause" is merged in "causal law," and the
definition of a "causal law" is found to be far from simple. There must
necessarily be _some a priori_ principle involved in inference from
the existence of one thing to that of another, if such inference is ever
valid; but it would appear from the above analysis that the principle in
question is induction, not causality. Whether inferences from past to
future are valid depends wholly, if our discussion has been sound, upon
the inductive principle: if it is true, such inferences are valid, and
if it is false, they are invalid.

IV. I come now to the question how the conception of causal laws which
we have arrived at is related to the traditional conception of cause as
it occurs in philosophy and common sense.

Historically, the notion of cause has been bound up with that of human
volition. The typical cause would be the fiat of a king. The cause is
supposed to be "active," the effect "passive." From this it is easy to
pass on to the suggestion that a "true" cause must contain some
prevision of the effect; hence the effect becomes the "end" at which the
cause aims, and teleology replaces causation in the explanation of
nature. But all such ideas, as applied to physics, are mere
anthropomorphic superstitions. It is as a reaction against these errors
that Mach and others have urged a purely "descriptive" view of physics:
physics, they say, does not aim at telling us "why" things happen, but
only "how" they happen. And if the question "why?" means anything more
than the search for a general law according to which a phenomenon
occurs, then it is certainly the case that this question cannot be
answered in physics and ought not to be asked. In this sense, the
descriptive view is indubitably in the right. But in using causal laws
to support inferences from the observed to the unobserved, physics
ceases to be _purely_ descriptive, and it is these laws which give the
scientifically useful part of the traditional notion of "cause." There
is therefore _something_ to preserve in this notion, though it is a very
tiny part of what is commonly assumed in orthodox metaphysics.

In order to understand the difference between the kind of cause which
science uses and the kind which we naturally imagine, it is necessary to
shut out, by an effort, everything that differentiates between past and
future. This is an extraordinarily difficult thing to do, because our
mental life is so intimately bound up with difference. Not only do
memory and hope make a difference in our feelings as regards past and
future, but almost our whole vocabulary is filled with the idea of
activity, of things done now for the sake of their future effects. All
transitive verbs involve the notion of cause as activity, and would have
to be replaced by some cumbrous periphrasis before this notion could be
eliminated.

Consider such a statement as, "Brutus killed Csar." On another
occasion, Brutus and Csar might engage our attention, but for the
present it is the killing that we have to study. We may say that to kill
a person is to cause his death intentionally. This means that desire for
a person's death causes a certain act, because it is believed that that
act will cause the person's death; or more accurately, the desire and
the belief jointly cause the act. Brutus desires that Csar should be
dead, and believes that he will be dead if he is stabbed; Brutus
therefore stabs him, and the stab causes Csar's death, as Brutus
expected it would. Every act which realises a purpose involves two
causal steps in this way: C is desired, and it is believed (truly if the
purpose is achieved) that B will cause C; the desire and the belief
together cause B, which in turn causes C. Thus we have first A, which is
a desire for C and a belief that B (an act) will cause C; then we have
B, the act caused by A, and believed to be a cause of C; then, if the
belief was correct, we have C, caused by B, and if the belief was
incorrect we have disappointment. Regarded purely scientifically, this
series A, B, C may equally well be considered in the inverse order, as
they would be at a coroner's inquest. But from the point of view of
Brutus, the desire, which comes at the beginning, is what makes the
whole series interesting. We feel that if his desires had been
different, the effects which he in fact produced would not have
occurred. This is true, and gives him a sense of power and freedom. It
is equally true that if the effects had not occurred, his desires would
have been different, since being what they were the effects did occur.
Thus the desires are determined by their consequences just as much as
the consequences by the desires; but as we cannot (in general) know in
advance the consequences of our desires without knowing our desires,
this form of inference is uninteresting as applied to our own acts,
though quite vital as applied to those of others.

A cause, considered scientifically, has none of that analogy with
volition which makes us imagine that the effect is _compelled_ by it. A
cause is an event or group of events, of some known general character,
and having a known relation to some other event, called the effect; the
relation being of such a kind that only one event, or at any rate only
one well-defined sort of event, can have the relation to a given cause.
It is customary only to give the name "effect" to an event which is
later than the cause, but there is no kind of reason for this
restriction. We shall do better to allow the effect to be before the
cause or simultaneous with it, because nothing of any scientific
importance depends upon its being after the cause.

If the inference from cause to effect is to be indubitable, it seems
that the cause can hardly stop short of the whole universe. So long as
anything is left out, something may be left out which alters the
expected result. But for practical and scientific purposes, phenomena
can be collected into groups which are causally self-contained, or
nearly so. In the common notion of causation, the cause is a single
event--we say the lightning causes the thunder, and so on. But it is
difficult to know what we mean by a single event; and it generally
appears that, in order to have anything approaching certainty concerning
the effect, it is necessary to include many more circumstances in the
cause than unscientific common sense would suppose. But often a probable
causal connection, where the cause is fairly simple, is of more
practical importance than a more indubitable connection in which the
cause is so complex as to be hard to ascertain.

To sum up: the strict, certain, universal law of causation which
philosophers advocate is an ideal, possibly true, but not _known_ to be
true in virtue of any available evidence. What is actually known, as a
matter of empirical science, is that certain constant relations are
observed to hold between the members of a group of events at certain
times, and that when such relations fail, as they sometimes do, it is
usually possible to discover a new, more constant relation by enlarging
the group. Any such constant relation between events of specified kinds
with given intervals of time between them is a "causal law." But all
causal laws are liable to exceptions, if the cause is less than the
whole state of the universe; we believe, on the basis of a good deal of
experience, that such exceptions can be dealt with by enlarging the
group we call the cause, but this belief, wherever it is still
unverified, ought not to be regarded as certain, but only as suggesting
a direction for further inquiry.

A very common causal group consists of volitions and the consequent
bodily acts, though exceptions arise (for example) through sudden
paralysis. Another very frequent connection (though here the exceptions
are much more numerous) is between a bodily act and the realisation of
the purpose which led to the act. These connections are patent, whereas
the causes of desires are more obscure. Thus it is natural to begin
causal series with desires, to suppose that all causes are analogous to
desires, and that desires themselves arise spontaneously. Such a view,
however, is not one which any serious psychologist would maintain. But
this brings us to the question of the application of our analysis of
cause to the problem of free will.

V. The problem of free will is so intimately bound up with the analysis
of causation that, old as it is, we need not despair of obtaining new
light on it by the help of new views on the notion of cause. The
free-will problem has, at one time or another, stirred men's passions
profoundly, and the fear that the will might not be free has been to
some men a source of great unhappiness. I believe that, under the
influence of a cool analysis, the doubtful questions involved will be
found to have no such emotional importance as is sometimes thought,
since the disagreeable consequences supposed to flow from a denial of
free will do not flow from this denial in any form in which there is
reason to make it. It is not, however, on this account chiefly that I
wish to discuss this problem, but rather because it affords a good
example of the clarifying effect of analysis and of the interminable
controversies which may result from its neglect.

Let us first try to discover what it is we really desire when we desire
free will. Some of our reasons for desiring free will are profound, some
trivial. To begin with the former: we do not wish to feel ourselves in
the hands of fate, so that, however much we may desire to will one
thing, we may nevertheless be compelled by an outside force to will
another. We do not wish to think that, however much we may desire to act
well, heredity and surroundings may force us into acting ill. We wish to
feel that, in cases of doubt, our choice is momentous and lies within
our power. Besides these desires, which are worthy of all respect, we
have, however, others not so respectable, which equally make us desire
free will. We do not like to think that other people, if they knew
enough, could predict our actions, though we know that we can often
predict those of other people, especially if they are elderly. Much as
we esteem the old gentleman who is our neighbour in the country, we know
that when grouse are mentioned he will tell the story of the grouse in
the gun-room. But we ourselves are not so mechanical: we never tell an
anecdote to the same person twice, or even once unless he is sure to
enjoy it; although we once met (say) Bismarck, we are quite capable of
hearing him mentioned without relating the occasion when we met him. In
this sense, everybody thinks that he himself has free will, though he
knows that no one else has. The desire for this kind of free will seems
to be no better than a form of vanity. I do not believe that this desire
can be gratified with any certainty; but the other, more respectable
desires are, I believe, not inconsistent with any tenable form of
determinism.

We have thus two questions to consider: (1) Are human actions
theoretically predictable from a sufficient number of antecedents? (2)
Are human actions subject to an external compulsion? The two questions,
as I shall try to show, are entirely distinct, and we may answer the
first in the affirmative without therefore being forced to give an
affirmative answer to the second.

(1) _Are human actions theoretically predictable from a sufficient
number of antecedents?_ Let us first endeavour to give precision to this
question. We may state the question thus: Is there some constant
relation between an act and a certain number of earlier events, such
that, when the earlier events are given, only one act, or at most only
acts with some well-marked character, can have this relation to the
earlier events? If this is the case, then, as soon as the earlier events
are known, it is theoretically possible to predict either the precise
act, or at least the character necessary to its fulfilling the constant
relation.

To this question, a negative answer has been given by Bergson, in a form
which calls in question the general applicability of the law of
causation. He maintains that every event, and more particularly every
mental event, embodies so much of the past that it could not possibly
have occurred at any earlier time, and is therefore necessarily quite
different from all previous and subsequent events. If, for example, I
read a certain poem many times, my experience on each occasion is
modified by the previous readings, and my emotions are never repeated
exactly. The principle of causation, according to him, asserts that the
same cause, if repeated, will produce the same effect. But owing to
memory, he contends, this principle does not apply to mental events.
What is apparently the same cause, if repeated, is modified by the mere
fact of repetition, and cannot produce the same effect. He infers that
every mental event is a genuine novelty, not predictable from the past,
because the past contains nothing exactly like it by which we could
imagine it. And on this ground he regards the freedom of the will as
unassailable.

Bergson's contention has undoubtedly a great deal of truth, and I have
no wish to deny its importance. But I do not think its consequences are
quite what he believes them to be. It is not necessary for the
determinist to maintain that he can foresee the whole particularity of
the act which will be performed. If he could foresee that A was going to
murder B, his foresight would not be invalidated by the fact that he
could not know all the infinite complexity of A's state of mind in
committing the murder, nor whether the murder was to be performed with a
knife or with a revolver. If the _kind_ of act which will be performed
can be foreseen within narrow limits, it is of little practical interest
that there are fine shades which cannot be foreseen. No doubt every time
the story of the grouse in the gun-room is told, there will be slight
differences due to increasing habitualness, but they do not invalidate
the prediction that the story will be told. And there is nothing in
Bergson's argument to show that we can never predict what _kind_ of act
will be performed.

Again, his statement of the law of causation is inadequate. The law does
not state merely that, if the _same_ cause is repeated, the _same_
effect will result. It states rather that there is a constant relation
between causes of certain kinds and effects of certain kinds. For
example, if a body falls freely, there is a constant relation between
the height through which it falls and the time it takes in falling. It
is not necessary to have a body fall through the _same_ height which has
been previously observed, in order to be able to foretell the length of
time occupied in falling. If this were necessary, no prediction would be
possible, since it would be impossible to make the height exactly the
same on two occasions. Similarly, the attraction which the sun will
exert on the earth is not only known at distances for which it has been
observed, but at all distances, because it is known to vary as the
inverse square of the distance. In fact, what is found to be repeated is
always the _relation_ of cause and effect, not the cause itself; all
that is necessary as regards the cause is that it should be of the same
_kind_ (in the relevant respect) as earlier causes whose effects have
been observed.

Another respect in which Bergson's statement of causation is inadequate
is in its assumption that the cause must be _one_ event, whereas it may
be two or more events, or even some continuous process. The substantive
question at issue is whether mental events are determined by the past.
Now in such a case as the repeated reading of a poem, it is obvious that
our feelings in reading the poem are most emphatically dependent upon
the past, but not upon one single event in the past. All our previous
readings of the poem must be included in the cause. But we easily
perceive a certain law according to which the effect varies as the
previous readings increase in number, and in fact Bergson himself
tacitly assumes such a law. We decide at last not to read the poem
again, because we know that this time the effect would be boredom. We
may not know all the niceties and shades of the boredom we should feel,
but we know enough to guide our decision, and the prophecy of boredom is
none the less true for being more or less general. Thus the kinds of
cases upon which Bergson relies are insufficient to show the
impossibility of prediction in the only sense in which prediction has
practical or emotional interest. We may therefore leave the
consideration of his arguments and address ourselves to the problem
directly.

The law of causation, according to which later events can theoretically
be predicted by means of earlier events, has often been held to be _a
priori_, a necessity of thought, a category without which science would
be impossible. These claims seem to me excessive. In certain directions
the law has been verified empirically, and in other directions there is
no positive evidence against it. But science can use it where it has
been found to be true, without being forced into any assumption as to
its truth in other fields. We cannot, therefore, feel any _a priori_
certainty that causation must apply to human volitions.

The question how far human volitions are subject to causal laws is a
purely empirical one. Empirically it seems plain that the great majority
of our volitions have causes, but it cannot, on this account, be held
necessarily certain that all have causes. There are, however, precisely
the same kinds of reasons for regarding it as probable that they all
have causes as there are in the case of physical events.

We may suppose--though this is doubtful--that there are laws of
correlation of the mental and the physical, in virtue of which, given
the state of all the matter in the world, and therefore of all the
brains and living organisms, the state of all the minds in the world
could be inferred, while conversely the state of all the matter in the
world could be inferred if the state of all the minds were given. It is
obvious that there is _some_ degree of correlation between brain and
mind, and it is impossible to say how complete it may be. This, however,
is not the point which I wish to elicit. What I wish to urge is that,
even if we admit the most extreme claims of determinism and of
correlation of mind and brain, still the consequences inimical to what
is worth preserving in free will do not follow. The belief that they
follow results, I think, entirely from the assimilation of causes to
volitions, and from the notion that causes _compel_ their effects in
some sense analogous to that in which a human authority can compel a man
to do what he would rather not do. This assimilation, as soon as the
true nature of scientific causal laws is realised, is seen to be a sheer
mistake. But this brings us to the second of the two questions which we
raised in regard to free will, namely, whether, assuming determinism,
our actions can be in any proper sense regarded as compelled by outside
forces.

(2) _Are human actions subject to an external compulsion?_ We have, in
deliberation, a subjective sense of freedom, which is sometimes alleged
against the view that volitions have causes. This sense of freedom,
however, is only a sense that we can choose which we please of a number
of alternatives: it does not show us that there is no causal connection
between what we please to choose and our previous history. The supposed
inconsistency of these two springs from the habit of conceiving causes
as analogous to volitions--a habit which often survives unconsciously in
those who intend to conceive causes in a more scientific manner. If a
cause is analogous to a volition, outside causes will be analogous to an
alien will, and acts predictable from outside causes will be subject to
compulsion. But this view of cause is one to which science lends no
countenance. Causes, we have seen, do not _compel_ their effects, any
more than effects _compel_ their causes. There is a mutual relation, so
that either can be inferred from the other. When the geologist infers
the past state of the earth from its present state, we should not say
that the present state _compels_ the past state to have been what it
was; yet it renders it necessary as a consequence of the data, in the
only sense in which effects are rendered necessary by their causes. The
difference which we _feel_, in this respect, between causes and effects
is a mere confusion due to the fact that we remember past events but do
not happen to have memory of the future.

The apparent indeterminateness of the future, upon which some advocates
of free will rely, is merely a result of our ignorance. It is plain that
no desirable kind of free will can be dependent simply upon our
ignorance; for if that were the case, animals would be more free than
men, and savages than civilised people. Free will in any valuable sense
must be compatible with the fullest knowledge. Now, quite apart from any
assumption as to causality, it is obvious that complete knowledge would
embrace the future as well as the past. Our knowledge of the past is not
wholly based upon causal inferences, but is partly derived from memory.
It is a mere accident that we have no memory of the future. We might--as
in the pretended visions of seers--see future events immediately, in the
way in which we see past events. They certainly will be what they will
be, and are in this sense just as determined as the past. If we saw
future events in the same immediate way in which we see past events,
what kind of free will would still be possible? Such a kind would be
wholly independent of determinism: it could not be contrary to even the
most entirely universal reign of causality. And such a kind must contain
whatever is worth having in free will, since it is impossible to believe
that mere ignorance can be the essential condition of any good thing.
Let us therefore imagine a set of beings who know the whole future with
absolute certainty, and let us ask ourselves whether they could have
anything that we should call free will.

Such beings as we are imagining would not have to wait for the event in
order to know what decision they were going to adopt on some future
occasion. They would know now what their volitions were going to be. But
would they have any reason to regret this knowledge? Surely not, unless
the foreseen volitions were in themselves regrettable. And it is less
likely that the foreseen volitions would be regrettable if the steps
which would lead to them were also foreseen. It is difficult not to
suppose that what is foreseen is fated, and must happen however much it
may be dreaded. But human actions are the outcome of desire, and no
foreseeing can be true unless it takes account of desire. A foreseen
volition will have to be one which does not become odious through being
foreseen. The beings we are imagining would easily come to know the
causal connections of volitions, and therefore their volitions would be
better calculated to satisfy their desires than ours are. Since
volitions are the outcome of desires, a prevision of volitions contrary
to desires could not be a true one. It must be remembered that the
supposed prevision would not create the future any more than memory
creates the past. We do not think we were necessarily not free in the
past, merely because we can now remember our past volitions. Similarly,
we might be free in the future, even if we could now see what our future
volitions were going to be. Freedom, in short, in any valuable sense,
demands only that our volitions shall be, as they are, the result of our
own desires, not of an outside force compelling us to will what we would
rather not will. Everything else is confusion of thought, due to the
feeling that knowledge _compels_ the happening of what it knows when
this is future, though it is at once obvious that knowledge has no such
power in regard to the past. Free will, therefore, is true in the only
form which is important; and the desire for other forms is a mere effect
of insufficient analysis.

                   *       *       *       *       *

What has been said on philosophical method in the foregoing lectures has
been rather by means of illustrations in particular cases than by means
of general precepts. Nothing of any value can be said on method except
through examples; but now, at the end of our course, we may collect
certain general maxims which may possibly be a help in acquiring a
philosophical habit of mind and a guide in looking for solutions of
philosophic problems.

Philosophy does not become scientific by making use of other sciences,
in the kind of way in which (_e.g._) Herbert Spencer does. Philosophy
aims at what is _general_, and the special sciences, however they may
_suggest_ large generalisations, cannot make them certain. And a hasty
generalisation, such as Spencer's generalisation of evolution, is none
the less hasty because what is generalised is the latest scientific
theory. Philosophy is a study apart from the other sciences: its results
cannot be established by the other sciences, and conversely must not be
such as some other science might conceivably contradict. Prophecies as
to the future of the universe, for example, are not the business of
philosophy; whether the universe is progressive, retrograde, or
stationary, it is not for the philosopher to say.

In order to become a scientific philosopher, a certain peculiar mental
discipline is required. There must be present, first of all, the desire
to know philosophical truth, and this desire must be sufficiently strong
to survive through years when there seems no hope of its finding any
satisfaction. The desire to know philosophical truth is very rare--in
its purity, it is not often found even among philosophers. It is
obscured sometimes--particularly after long periods of fruitless
search--by the desire to _think_ we know. Some plausible opinion
presents itself, and by turning our attention away from the objections
to it, or merely by not making great efforts to find objections to it,
we may obtain the comfort of believing it, although, if we had resisted
the wish for comfort, we should have come to see that the opinion was
false. Again the desire for unadulterated truth is often obscured, in
professional philosophers, by love of system: the one little fact which
will not come inside the philosopher's edifice has to be pushed and
tortured until it seems to consent. Yet the one little fact is more
likely to be important for the future than the system with which it is
inconsistent. Pythagoras invented a system which fitted admirably with
all the facts he knew, except the incommensurability of the diagonal of
a square and the side; this one little fact stood out, and remained a
fact even after Hippasos of Metapontion was drowned for revealing it. To
us, the discovery of this fact is the chief claim of Pythagoras to
immortality, while his system has become a matter of merely historical
curiosity.[57] Love of system, therefore, and the system-maker's vanity
which becomes associated with it, are among the snares that the student
of philosophy must guard against.

  [57] The above remarks, for purposes of illustration, adopt one of
  several possible opinions on each of several disputed points.

The desire to establish this or that result, or generally to discover
evidence for agreeable results, of whatever kind, has of course been the
chief obstacle to honest philosophising. So strangely perverted do men
become by unrecognised passions, that a determination in advance to
arrive at this or that conclusion is generally regarded as a mark of
virtue, and those whose studies lead to an opposite conclusion are
thought to be wicked. No doubt it is commoner to wish to arrive at an
agreeable result than to wish to arrive at a true result. But only those
in whom the desire to arrive at a _true_ result is paramount can hope to
serve any good purpose by the study of philosophy.

But even when the desire to know exists in the requisite strength, the
mental vision by which abstract truth is recognised is hard to
distinguish from vivid imaginability and consonance with mental habits.
It is necessary to practise methodological doubt, like Descartes, in
order to loosen the hold of mental habits; and it is necessary to
cultivate logical imagination, in order to have a number of hypotheses
at command, and not to be the slave of the one which common sense has
rendered easy to imagine. These two processes, of doubting the familiar
and imagining the unfamiliar, are correlative, and form the chief part
of the mental training required for a philosopher.

The nave beliefs which we find in ourselves when we first begin the
process of philosophic reflection may turn out, in the end, to be almost
all capable of a true interpretation; but they ought all, before being
admitted into philosophy, to undergo the ordeal of sceptical criticism.
Until they have gone through this ordeal, they are mere blind habits,
ways of behaving rather than intellectual convictions. And although it
may be that a majority will pass the test, we may be pretty sure that
some will not, and that a serious readjustment of our outlook ought to
result. In order to break the dominion of habit, we must do our best to
doubt the senses, reason, morals, everything in short. In some
directions, doubt will be found possible; in others, it will be checked
by that direct vision of abstract truth upon which the possibility of
philosophical knowledge depends.

At the same time, and as an essential aid to the direct perception of
the truth, it is necessary to acquire fertility in imagining abstract
hypotheses. This is, I think, what has most of all been lacking hitherto
in philosophy. So meagre was the logical apparatus that all the
hypotheses philosophers could imagine were found to be inconsistent with
the facts. Too often this state of things led to the adoption of heroic
measures, such as a wholesale denial of the facts, when an imagination
better stocked with logical tools would have found a key to unlock the
mystery. It is in this way that the study of logic becomes the central
study in philosophy: it gives the method of research in philosophy, just
as mathematics gives the method in physics. And as physics, which, from
Plato to the Renaissance, was as unprogressive, dim, and superstitious
as philosophy, became a science through Galileo's fresh observation of
facts and subsequent mathematical manipulation, so philosophy, in our
own day, is becoming scientific through the simultaneous acquisition of
new facts and logical methods.

In spite, however, of the new possibility of progress in philosophy, the
first effect, as in the case of physics, is to diminish very greatly the
extent of what is thought to be known. Before Galileo, people believed
themselves possessed of immense knowledge on all the most interesting
questions in physics. He established certain facts as to the way in
which bodies fall, not very interesting on their own account, but of
quite immeasurable interest as examples of real knowledge and of a new
method whose future fruitfulness he himself divined. But his few facts
sufficed to destroy the whole vast system of supposed knowledge handed
down from Aristotle, as even the palest morning sun suffices to
extinguish the stars. So in philosophy: though some have believed one
system, and others another, almost all have been of opinion that a great
deal was known; but all this supposed knowledge in the traditional
systems must be swept away, and a new beginning must be made, which we
shall esteem fortunate indeed if it can attain results comparable to
Galileo's law of falling bodies.

By the practice of methodological doubt, if it is genuine and prolonged,
a certain humility as to our knowledge is induced: we become glad to
know _anything_ in philosophy, however seemingly trivial. Philosophy has
suffered from the lack of this kind of modesty. It has made the mistake
of attacking the interesting problems at once, instead of proceeding
patiently and slowly, accumulating whatever solid knowledge was
obtainable, and trusting the great problems to the future. Men of
science are not ashamed of what is intrinsically trivial, if its
consequences are likely to be important; the _immediate_ outcome of an
experiment is hardly ever interesting on its own account. So in
philosophy, it is often desirable to expend time and care on matters
which, judged alone, might seem frivolous, for it is often only through
the consideration of such matters that the greater problems can be
approached.

When our problem has been selected, and the necessary mental discipline
has been acquired, the method to be pursued is fairly uniform. The big
problems which provoke philosophical inquiry are found, on examination,
to be complex, and to depend upon a number of component problems,
usually more abstract than those of which they are the components. It
will generally be found that all our initial data, all the facts that we
seem to know to begin with, suffer from vagueness, confusion, and
complexity. Current philosophical ideas share these defects; it is
therefore necessary to create an apparatus of precise conceptions as
general and as free from complexity as possible, before the data can be
analysed into the kind of premisses which philosophy aims at
discovering. In this process of analysis, the source of difficulty is
tracked further and further back, growing at each stage more abstract,
more refined, more difficult to apprehend. Usually it will be found that
a number of these extraordinarily abstract questions underlie any one of
the big obvious problems. When everything has been done that can be done
by method, a stage is reached where only direct philosophic vision can
carry matters further. Here only genius will avail. What is wanted, as a
rule, is some new effort of logical imagination, some glimpse of a
possibility never conceived before, and then the direct perception that
this possibility is realised in the case in question. Failure to think
of the right possibility leaves insoluble difficulties, balanced
arguments pro and con, utter bewilderment and despair. But the right
possibility, as a rule, when once conceived, justifies itself swiftly by
its astonishing power of absorbing apparently conflicting facts. From
this point onward, the work of the philosopher is synthetic and
comparatively easy; it is in the very last stage of the analysis that
the real difficulty consists.

Of the prospect of progress in philosophy, it would be rash to speak
with confidence. Many of the traditional problems of philosophy, perhaps
most of those which have interested a wider circle than that of
technical students, do not appear to be soluble by scientific methods.
Just as astronomy lost much of its human interest when it ceased to be
astrology, so philosophy must lose in attractiveness as it grows less
prodigal of promises. But to the large and still growing body of men
engaged in the pursuit of science--men who hitherto, not without
justification, have turned aside from philosophy with a certain
contempt--the new method, successful already in such time-honoured
problems as number, infinity, continuity, space and time, should make an
appeal which the older methods have wholly failed to make. Physics, with
its principle of relativity and its revolutionary investigations into
the nature of matter, is feeling the need for that kind of novelty in
fundamental hypotheses which scientific philosophy aims at facilitating.
The one and only condition, I believe, which is necessary in order to
secure for philosophy in the near future an achievement surpassing all
that has hitherto been accomplished by philosophers, is the creation of
a school of men with scientific training and philosophical interests,
unhampered by the traditions of the past, and not misled by the literary
methods of those who copy the ancients in all except their merits.